TO THE GENTLEMEN-READERS [1] AND OTHERS THAT TAKE PLEASURE
IN READING HISTORIES. [2]

Gentlemen and courteous readers whosoever:  I have here published
in print, for your sakes, the two tragical discourses of the
Scythian shepherd Tamburlaine, that became so great a conqueror
and so mighty a monarch.  My hope is, that they will be now no
less acceptable unto you to read after your serious affairs and
studies than they have been lately delightful for many of you to
see when the same were shewed in London upon stages.  I have
purposely omitted and left out some fond [3] and frivolous
gestures,
digressing, and, in my poor opinion, far unmeet for the matter,
which I thought might seem more tedious unto the wise than any
way else to be regarded, though haply they have been of some
vain-conceited fondlings greatly gaped at, what time they were
shewed upon the stage in their graced deformities:  nevertheless
now to be mixtured in print with such matter of worth, it would
prove a great disgrace to so honourable and stately a history.
Great folly were it in me to commend unto your wisdoms either the
eloquence of the author that writ them or the worthiness of the
matter itself.  I therefore leave unto your learned censures [4]
both the one and the other, and myself the poor printer of them
unto your most courteous and favourable protection; which if you
vouchsafe to accept, you shall evermore bind me to employ what
travail and service I can to the advancing and pleasuring of your
excellent degree.
     Yours, most humble at commandment,
          R[ichard] J[ones], printer.



THE FIRST PART OF TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT.




THE PROLOGUE.

      From jigging veins of rhyming mother-wits,
      And such conceits as clownage keeps in pay,
      We'll lead you to the stately tent of war,
      Where you shall hear the Scythian Tamburlaine
      Threatening the world with high astounding terms,
      And scourging kingdoms with his conquering sword.
      View but his picture in this tragic glass,
      And then applaud his fortunes as you please.




DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

     MYCETES, king of Persia.
     COSROE, his brother.
     MEANDER,     ]
     THERIDAMAS,  ]
     ORTYGIUS,    ] Persian lords.
     CENEUS,      ]
     MENAPHON,    ]
     TAMBURLAINE, a Scythian shepherd.
     TECHELLES,   ]
     USUMCASANE,  ] his followers.
     BAJAZETH, emperor of the Turks.
     KING OF FEZ.
     KING OF MOROCCO.
     KING OF ARGIER.
     KING OF ARABIA.
     SOLDAN OF EGYPT.
     GOVERNOR OF DAMASCUS.
     AGYDAS,      ]
     MAGNETES,    ] Median lords.
     CAPOLIN, an Egyptian.
     PHILEMUS, Bassoes, Lords, Citizens, Moors, Soldiers, and
     Attendants.

     ZENOCRATE, daughter to the Soldan of Egypt.
     ANIPPE, her maid.
     ZABINA, wife to BAJAZETH.
     EBEA, her maid.
     Virgins of Damascus.




THE FIRST PART OF TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT.




ACT I.




SCENE I.

          Enter MYCETES, COSROE, MEANDER, THERIDAMAS, ORTYGIUS,
          CENEUS, MENAPHON, with others.

     MYCETES. Brother Cosroe, I find myself agriev'd;
     Yet insufficient to express the same,
     For it requires a great and thundering speech:
     Good brother, tell the cause unto my lords;
     I know you have a better wit than I.

     COSROE. Unhappy Persia,--that in former age
     Hast been the seat of mighty conquerors,
     That, in their prowess and their policies,
     Have triumph'd over Afric, [5] and the bounds
     Of Europe where the sun dares scarce appear
     For freezing meteors and congealed cold,--
     Now to be rul'd and govern'd by a man
     At whose birth-day Cynthia with Saturn join'd,
     And Jove, the Sun, and Mercury denied
     To shed their [6] influence in his fickle brain!
     Now Turks and Tartars shake their swords at thee,
     Meaning to mangle all thy provinces.

     MYCETES. Brother, I see your meaning well enough,
     And through [7] your planets I perceive you think
     I am not wise enough to be a king:
     But I refer me to my noblemen,
     That know my wit, and can be witnesses.
     I might command you to be slain for this,--
     Meander, might I not?

     MEANDER. Not for so small a fault, my sovereign lord.

     MYCETES. I mean it not, but yet I know I might.--
     Yet live; yea, live; Mycetes wills it so.--
     Meander, thou, my faithful counsellor,
     Declare the cause of my conceived grief,
     Which is, God knows, about that Tamburlaine,
     That, like a fox in midst of harvest-time,
     Doth prey upon my flocks of passengers;
     And, as I hear, doth mean to pull my plumes:
     Therefore 'tis good and meet for to be wise.

     MEANDER. Oft have I heard your majesty complain
     Of Tamburlaine, that sturdy Scythian thief,
     That robs your merchants of Persepolis
     Trading by land unto the Western Isles,
     And in your confines with his lawless train
     Daily commits incivil [8] outrages,
     Hoping (misled by dreaming prophecies)
     To reign in Asia, and with barbarous arms
     To make himself the monarch of the East:
     But, ere he march in Asia, or display
     His vagrant ensign in the Persian fields,
     Your grace hath taken order by Theridamas,
     Charg'd with a thousand horse, to apprehend
     And bring him captive to your highness' throne.

     MYCETES. Full true thou speak'st, and like thyself, my lord,
     Whom I may term a Damon for thy love:
     Therefore 'tis best, if so it like you all,
     To send my thousand horse incontinent [9]
     To apprehend that paltry Scythian.
     How like you this, my honourable lords?
     Is it not a kingly resolution?

     COSROE. It cannot choose, because it comes from you.

     MYCETES. Then hear thy charge, valiant Theridamas,
     The chiefest [10] captain of Mycetes' host,
     The hope of Persia, and the very legs
     Whereon our state doth lean as on a staff,
     That holds us up and foils our neighbour foes:
     Thou shalt be leader of this thousand horse,
     Whose foaming gall with rage and high disdain
     Have sworn the death of wicked Tamburlaine.
     Go frowning forth; but come thou smiling home,
     As did Sir Paris with the Grecian dame:
     Return with speed; time passeth swift away;
     Our life is frail, and we may die to-day.

     THERIDAMAS. Before the moon renew her borrow'd light,
     Doubt not, my lord and gracious sovereign,
     But Tamburlaine and that Tartarian rout [11]
     Shall either perish by our warlike hands,
     Or plead for mercy at your highness' feet.

     MYCETES. Go, stout Theridamas; thy words are swords,
     And with thy looks thou conquerest all thy foes.
     I long to see thee back return from thence,
     That I may view these milk-white steeds of mine
     All loaden with the heads of killed men,
     And, from their knees even to their hoofs below,
     Besmear'd with blood that makes a dainty show.

     THERIDAMAS. Then now, my lord, I humbly take my leave.

     MYCETES. Theridamas, farewell ten thousand times.

          [Exit THERIDAMAS.]

     Ah, Menaphon, why stay'st thou thus behind,
     When other men press [12] forward for renown?
     Go, Menaphon, go into Scythia,
     And foot by foot follow Theridamas.

     COSROE. Nay, pray you, [13] let him stay; a greater [task]
     Fits Menaphon than warring with a thief:
     Create him pro-rex of all [14] Africa,
     That he may win the Babylonians' hearts,
     Which will revolt from Persian government,
     Unless they have a wiser king than you.

     MYCETES. Unless they have a wiser king than you!
     These are his words; Meander, set them down.

     COSROE. And add this to them,--that all Asia
     Lament to see the folly of their king.

     MYCETES. Well, here I swear by this my royal seat--

     COSROE. You may do well to kiss it, then.

     MYCETES. Emboss'd with silk as best beseems my state,
     To be reveng'd for these contemptuous words!
     O, where is duty and allegiance now?
     Fled to the Caspian or the Ocean main?
     What shall I call thee? brother? no, a foe;
     Monster of nature, shame unto thy stock,
     That dar'st presume thy sovereign for to mock!--
     Meander, come:  I am abus'd, Meander.

          [Exeunt all except COSROE and MENAPHON.]

     MENAPHON. How now, my lord! what, mated [15] and amaz'd
     To hear the king thus threaten like himself!

     COSROE. Ah, Menaphon, I pass not [16] for his threats!
     The plot is laid by Persian noblemen
     And captains of the Median garrisons
     To crown me emperor of Asia:
     But this it is that doth excruciate
     The very substance of my vexed soul,
     To see our neighbours, that were wont to quake
     And tremble at the Persian monarch's name,
     Now sit and laugh our regiment [17] to scorn;
     And that which might resolve [18] me into tears,
     Men from the farthest equinoctial line
     Have swarm'd in troops into the Eastern India,
     Lading their ships [19] with gold and precious stones,
     And made their spoils from all our provinces.

     MENAPHON. This should entreat your highness to rejoice,
     Since Fortune gives you opportunity
     To gain the title of a conqueror
     By curing of this maimed empery.
     Afric and Europe bordering on your land,
     And continent to your dominions,
     How easily may you, with a mighty host,
     Pass [20] into Graecia, as did Cyrus once,
     And cause them to withdraw their forces home,
     Lest you [21] subdue the pride of Christendom!

          [Trumpet within.]

     COSROE. But, Menaphon, what means this trumpet's sound?

     MENAPHON. Behold, my lord, Ortygius and the rest
     Bringing the crown to make you emperor!

          Re-enter ORTYGIUS and CENEUS, [22] with others, bearing a
          crown.

     ORTYGIUS. Magnificent and mighty prince Cosroe,
     We, in the name of other Persian states [23]
     And commons of this mighty monarchy,
     Present thee with th' imperial diadem.

     CENEUS. The warlike soldiers and the gentlemen,
     That heretofore have fill'd Persepolis
     With Afric captains taken in the field,
     Whose ransom made them march in coats of gold,
     With costly jewels hanging at their ears,
     And shining stones upon their lofty crests,
     Now living idle in the walled towns,
     Wanting both pay and martial discipline,
     Begin in troops to threaten civil war,
     And openly exclaim against their [24] king:
     Therefore, to stay all sudden mutinies,
     We will invest your highness emperor;
     Whereat the soldiers will conceive more joy
     Than did the Macedonians at the spoil
     Of great Darius and his wealthy host.

     COSROE. Well, since I see the state of Persia droop
     And languish in my brother's government,
     I willingly receive th' imperial crown,
     And vow to wear it for my country's good,
     In spite of them shall malice my estate.

     ORTYGIUS. And, in assurance of desir'd success,
     We here do crown thee monarch of the East [;]
     Emperor of Asia and Persia; [25]
     Great lord of Media and Armenia;
     Duke of Africa and Albania,
     Mesopotamia and of Parthia,
     East India and the late-discover'd isles;
     Chief lord of all the wide vast Euxine Sea,
     And of the ever-raging [26] Caspian Lake.

     ALL. [27] Long live Cosroe, mighty emperor!

     COSROE. And Jove may [28] never let me longer live
     Than I may seek to gratify your love,
     And cause the soldiers that thus honour me
     To triumph over many provinces!
     By whose desires of discipline in arms
     I doubt not shortly but to reign sole king,
     And with the army of Theridamas
     (Whither we presently will fly, my lords,)
     To rest secure against my brother's force.

     ORTYGIUS. We knew, [29] my lord, before we brought the crown,
     Intending your investion so near
     The residence of your despised brother,
     The lords [30] would not be too exasperate
     To injury [31] or suppress your worthy title;
     Or, if they would, there are in readiness
     Ten thousand horse to carry you from hence,
     In spite of all suspected enemies.

     COSROE. I know it well, my lord, and thank you all.

     ORTYGIUS. Sound up the trumpets, then.

          [Trumpets sounded.]

     ALL. [32] God save the king!

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE leading ZENOCRATE, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE,
          AGYDAS, MAGNETES, LORDS, and SOLDIERS loaden with treasure.

     TAMBURLAINE. Come, lady, let not this appal your thoughts;
     The jewels and the treasure we have ta'en
     Shall be reserv'd, and you in better state
     Than if you were arriv'd in Syria,
     Even in the circle of your father's arms,
     The mighty Soldan of Aegyptia.

     ZENOCRATE. Ah, shepherd, pity my distressed plight!
     (If, as thou seem'st, thou art so mean a man,)
     And seek not to enrich thy followers
     By lawless rapine from a silly maid,
     Who, travelling [33] with these Median lords
     To Memphis, from my uncle's country of Media,
     Where, all my youth, I have been governed,
     Have pass'd the army of the mighty Turk,
     Bearing his privy-signet and his hand
     To safe-conduct us thorough [34] Africa.

     MAGNETES. And, since we have arriv'd in Scythia,
     Besides rich presents from the puissant Cham,
     We have his highness' letters to command
     Aid and assistance, if we stand in need.

     TAMBURLAINE. But now you see these letters and commands
     Are countermanded by a greater man;
     And through my provinces you must expect
     Letters of conduct from my mightiness,
     If you intend to keep your treasure safe.
     But, since I love to live at liberty,
     As easily may you get the Soldan's crown
     As any prizes out of my precinct;
     For they are friends that help to wean my state
     Till men and kingdoms help to strengthen it,
     And must maintain my life exempt from servitude.--
     But, tell me, madam, is your grace betroth'd?

     ZENOCRATE. I am, my lord,--for so you do import.

     TAMBURLAINE. I am a lord, for so my deeds shall prove;
     And yet a shepherd by my parentage.
     But, lady, this fair face and heavenly hue
     Must grace his bed that conquers Asia,
     And means to be a terror to the world,
     Measuring the limits of his empery
     By east and west, as Phoebus doth his course.--
     Lie here, ye weeds, that I disdain to wear!
     This complete armour and this curtle-axe
     Are adjuncts more beseeming Tamburlaine.--
     And, madam, whatsoever you esteem
     Of this success, and loss unvalued, [35]
     Both may invest you empress of the East;
     And these that seem but silly country swains
     May have the leading of so great an host
     As with their weight shall make the mountains quake,
     Even as when windy exhalations,
     Fighting for passage, tilt within the earth.

     TECHELLES. As princely lions, when they rouse themselves,
     Stretching their paws, and threatening herds of beasts,
     So in his armour looketh Tamburlaine.
     Methinks I see kings kneeling at his feet,
     And he with frowning brows and fiery looks
     Spurning their crowns from off their captive heads.

     USUMCASANE. And making thee and me, Techelles, kings,
     That even to death will follow Tamburlaine.

     TAMBURLAINE. Nobly resolv'd, sweet friends and followers!
     These lords perhaps do scorn our estimates,
     And think we prattle with distemper'd spirits:
     But, since they measure our deserts so mean,
     That in conceit [36] bear empires on our spears,
     Affecting thoughts coequal with the clouds,
     They shall be kept our forced followers
     Till with their eyes they view us emperors.

     ZENOCRATE. The gods, defenders of the innocent.
     Will never prosper your intended drifts,
     That thus oppress poor friendless passengers.
     Therefore at least admit us liberty,
     Even as thou hop'st to be eternized
     By living Asia's mighty emperor.

     AGYDAS. I hope our lady's treasure and our own
     May serve for ransom to our liberties:
     Return our mules and empty camels back,
     That we may travel into Syria,
     Where her betrothed lord, Alcidamus,
     Expects the arrival of her highness' person.

     MAGNETES. And wheresoever we repose ourselves,
     We will report but well of Tamburlaine.

     TAMBURLAINE. Disdains Zenocrate to live with me?
     Or you, my lords, to be my followers?
     Think you I weigh this treasure more than you?
     Not all the gold in India's wealthy arms
     Shall buy the meanest soldier in my train.
     Zenocrate, lovelier than the love of Jove,
     Brighter than is the silver Rhodope, [37]
     Fairer than whitest snow on Scythian hills,
     Thy person is more worth to Tamburlaine
     Than the possession of the Persian crown,
     Which gracious stars have promis'd at my birth.
     A hundred Tartars shall attend on thee,
     Mounted on steeds swifter than Pegasus;
     Thy garments shall be made of Median silk,
     Enchas'd with precious jewels of mine own,
     More rich and valurous [38] than Zenocrate's;
     With milk-white harts upon an ivory sled
     Thou shalt be drawn amidst the frozen pools, [39]
     And scale the icy mountains' lofty tops,
     Which with thy beauty will be soon resolv'd: [40]
     My martial prizes, with five hundred men,
     Won on the fifty-headed Volga's waves,
     Shall we all offer [41] to Zenocrate,
     And then myself to fair Zenocrate.

     TECHELLES. What now! in love?

     TAMBURLAINE. Techelles, women must be flattered:
     But this is she with whom I am in [42] love.

          Enter a SOLDIER.

     SOLDIER. News, news!

     TAMBURLAINE. How now! what's the matter?

     SOLDIER. A thousand Persian horsemen are at hand,
     Sent from the king to overcome us all.

     TAMBURLAINE. How now, my lords of Egypt, and Zenocrate!
     Now must your jewels be restor'd again,
     And I, that triumph'd [43] so, be overcome?
     How say you, lordings? is not this your hope?

     AGYDAS. We hope yourself will willingly restore them.

     TAMBURLAINE. Such hope, such fortune, have the thousand horse.
     Soft ye, my lords, and sweet Zenocrate!
     You must be forced from me ere you go.--
     A thousand horsemen! we five hundred foot!
     An odds too great for us to stand against.
     But are they rich? and is their armour good!

     SOLDIER. Their plumed helms are wrought with beaten gold,
     Their swords enamell'd, and about their necks
     Hang massy chains of gold down to the waist;
     In every part exceeding brave [44] and rich.

     TAMBURLAINE. Then shall we fight courageously with them?
     Or look you I should play the orator?

     TECHELLES. No; cowards and faint-hearted runaways
     Look for orations when the foe is near:
     Our swords shall play the orators for us.

     USUMCASANE. Come, let us meet them at the mountain-top, [45]
     And with a sudden and an hot alarum
     Drive all their horses headlong down the hill.

     TECHELLES. Come, let us march.

     TAMBURLAINE. Stay, Techelles; ask a parle first.

          The SOLDIERS enter.

     Open the mails, [46] yet guard the treasure sure:
     Lay out our golden wedges to the view,
     That their reflections may amaze the Persians;
     And look we friendly on them when they come:
     But, if they offer word or violence,
     We'll fight, five hundred men-at-arms to one,
     Before we part with our possession;
     And 'gainst the general we will lift our swords,
     And either lance [47] his greedy thirsting throat,
     Or take him prisoner, and his chain shall serve
     For manacles till he be ransom'd home.

     TECHELLES. I hear them come:  shall we encounter them?

     TAMBURLAINE. Keep all your standings, and not stir a foot:
     Myself will bide the danger of the brunt.

          Enter THERIDAMAS with others.

     THERIDAMAS. Where is this [48] Scythian Tamburlaine?

     TAMBURLAINE. Whom seek'st thou, Persian?  I am Tamburlaine.

     THERIDAMAS. Tamburlaine!
     A Scythian shepherd so embellished
     With nature's pride and richest furniture!
     His looks do menace heaven and dare the gods;
     His fiery eyes are fix'd upon the earth,
     As if he now devis'd some stratagem,
     Or meant to pierce Avernus' darksome vaults [49]
     To pull the triple-headed dog from hell.

     TAMBURLAINE. Noble and mild this Persian seems to be,
     If outward habit judge the inward man.

     TECHELLES. His deep affections make him passionate.

     TAMBURLAINE. With what a majesty he rears his looks!--
     In thee, thou valiant man of Persia,
     I see the folly of thy [50] emperor.
     Art thou but captain of a thousand horse,
     That by characters graven in thy brows,
     And by thy martial face and stout aspect,
     Deserv'st to have the leading of an host?
     Forsake thy king, and do but join with me,
     And we will triumph over all the world:
     I hold the Fates bound fast in iron chains,
     And with my hand turn Fortune's wheel about;
     And sooner shall the sun fall from his sphere
     Than Tamburlaine be slain or overcome.
     Draw forth thy sword, thou mighty man-at-arms,
     Intending but to raze my charmed skin,
     And Jove himself will stretch his hand from heaven
     To ward the blow, and shield me safe from harm.
     See, how he rains down heaps of gold in showers,
     As if he meant to give my soldiers pay!
     And, as a sure and grounded argument
     That I shall be the monarch of the East,
     He sends this Soldan's daughter rich and brave, [51]
     To be my queen and portly emperess.
     If thou wilt stay with me, renowmed [52] man,
     And lead thy thousand horse with my conduct,
     Besides thy share of this Egyptian prize,
     Those thousand horse shall sweat with martial spoil
     Of conquer'd kingdoms and of cities sack'd:
     Both we will walk upon the lofty cliffs; [53]
     And Christian merchants, [54] that with Russian stems [55]
     Plough up huge furrows in the Caspian Sea,
     Shall vail [56] to us as lords of all the lake;
     Both we will reign as consuls of the earth,
     And mighty kings shall be our senators.
     Jove sometime masked in a shepherd's weed;
     And by those steps that he hath scal'd the heavens
     May we become immortal like the gods.
     Join with me now in this my mean estate,
     (I call it mean, because, being yet obscure,
     The nations far-remov'd admire me not,)
     And when my name and honour shall be spread
     As far as Boreas claps his brazen wings,
     Or fair Bootes [57] sends his cheerful light,
     Then shalt thou be competitor [58] with me,
     And sit with Tamburlaine in all his majesty.

     THERIDAMAS. Not Hermes, prolocutor to the gods,
     Could use persuasions more pathetical.

     TAMBURLAINE. Nor are Apollo's oracles more true
     Than thou shalt find my vaunts substantial.

     TECHELLES. We are his friends; and, if the Persian king
     Should offer present dukedoms to our state,
     We think it loss to make exchange for that
     We are assur'd of by our friend's success.

     USUMCASANE. And kingdoms at the least we all expect,
     Besides the honour in assured conquests,
     Where kings shall crouch unto our conquering swords,
     And hosts of soldiers stand amaz'd at us,
     When with their fearful tongues they shall confess,
     These are the men that all the world admires.

     THERIDAMAS. What strong enchantments tice my yielding soul
     To these [59] resolved, noble Scythians!
     But shall I prove a traitor to my king?

     TAMBURLAINE. No; but the trusty friend of Tamburlaine.

     THERIDAMAS. Won with thy words, and conquer'd with thy looks,
     I yield myself, my men, and horse to thee,
     To be partaker of thy good or ill,
     As long as life maintains Theridamas.

     TAMBURLAINE. Theridamas, my friend, take here my hand,
     Which is as much as if I swore by heaven,
     And call'd the gods to witness of my vow.
     Thus shall my heart be still combin'd with thine
     Until our bodies turn to elements,
     And both our souls aspire celestial thrones.--
     Techelles and Casane, welcome him.

     TECHELLES. Welcome, renowmed [60] Persian, to us all!

     USUMCASANE. Long may Theridamas remain with us!

     TAMBURLAINE. These are my friends, in whom I more rejoice
     Than doth the king of Persia in his crown;
     And, by the love of Pylades and Orestes,
     Whose statues [61] we adore in Scythia,
     Thyself and them shall never part from me
     Before I crown you kings [62] in Asia.
     Make much of them, gentle Theridamas,
     And they will never leave thee till the death.

     THERIDAMAS. Nor thee nor them, [63] thrice-noble Tamburlaine,
     Shall want my heart to be with gladness pierc'd,
     To do you honour and security.

     TAMBURLAINE. A thousand thanks, worthy Theridamas.--
     And now, fair madam, and my noble lords,
     If you will [64] willingly remain with me,
     You shall have honours as your merits be;
     Or else you shall be forc'd with slavery.

     AGYDAS. We yield unto thee, happy Tamburlaine.

     TAMBURLAINE. For you, then, madam, I am out of doubt.

     ZENOCRATE. I must be pleas'd perforce,--wretched Zenocrate!

          [Exeunt.]




ACT II.




SCENE I.

          Enter COSROE, MENAPHON, ORTYGIUS, and CENEUS, with SOLDIERS.

     COSROE. Thus far are we towards Theridamas,
     And valiant Tamburlaine, the man of fame,
     The man that in the forehead of his fortune
     Bears figures of renown and miracle.
     But tell me, that hast seen him, Menaphon,
     What stature wields he, and what personage?

     MENAPHON. Of stature tall, and straightly fashioned,
     Like his desire, lift upwards and divine;
     So large of limbs, his joints so strongly knit,
     Such breadth of shoulders as might mainly bear
     Old Atlas' burden; 'twixt his manly pitch, [65]
     A pearl more worth than all the world is plac'd,
     Wherein by curious sovereignty of art
     Are fix'd his piercing instruments of sight,
     Whose fiery circles bear encompassed
     A heaven of heavenly bodies in their spheres,
     That guides his steps and actions to the throne
     Where honour sits invested royally;
     Pale of complexion, wrought in him with passion,
     Thirsting with sovereignty and [66] love of arms;
     His lofty brows in folds do figure death,
     And in their smoothness amity and life;
     About them hangs a knot of amber hair,
     Wrapped in curls, as fierce Achilles' was,
     On which the breath of heaven delights to play,
     Making it dance with wanton majesty;
     His arms and fingers long and sinewy, [67]
     Betokening valour and excess of strength;--
     In every part proportion'd like the man
     Should make the world subdu'd [68] to Tamburlaine.

     COSROE. Well hast thou pourtray'd in thy terms of life
     The face and personage of a wondrous man:
     Nature doth strive with Fortune [69] and his stars
     To make him famous in accomplish'd worth;
     And well his merits shew him to be made
     His fortune's master and the king of men,
     That could persuade, at such a sudden pinch,
     With reasons of his valour and his life,
     A thousand sworn and overmatching foes.
     Then, when our powers in points of swords are join'd,
     And clos'd in compass of the killing bullet,
     Though strait the passage and the port [70] be made
     That leads to palace of my brother's life,
     Proud is [71] his fortune if we pierce it not;
     And, when the princely Persian diadem
     Shall overweigh his weary witless head,
     And fall, like mellow'd fruit, with shakes of death,
     In fair [72] Persia noble Tamburlaine
     Shall be my regent, and remain as king.

     ORTYGIUS. In happy hour we have set the crown
     Upon your kingly head, that seeks our honour
     In joining with the man ordain'd by heaven
     To further every action to the best.

     CENEUS. He that with shepherds and a little spoil
     Durst, in disdain of wrong and tyranny,
     Defend his freedom 'gainst a monarchy,
     What will he do supported by a king,
     Leading a troop of gentlemen and lords,
     And stuff'd with treasure for his highest thoughts!

     COSROE. And such shall wait on worthy Tamburlaine.
     Our army will be forty thousand strong,
     When Tamburlaine and brave Theridamas
     Have met us by the river Araris;
     And all conjoin'd to meet the witless king,
     That now is marching near to Parthia,
     And, with unwilling soldiers faintly arm'd,
     To seek revenge on me and Tamburlaine;
     To whom, sweet Menaphon, direct me straight.

     MENAPHON. I will, my lord.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter MYCETES, MEANDER, with other LORDS; and SOLDIERS.

     MYCETES. Come, my Meander, let us to this gear.
     I tell you true, my heart is swoln with wrath
     On this same thievish villain Tamburlaine,
     And of [73] that false Cosroe, my traitorous brother.
     Would it not grieve a king to be so abus'd,
     And have a thousand horsemen ta'en away?
     And, which is worse, [74] to have his diadem
     Sought for by such scald knaves as love him not?
     I think it would:  well, then, by heavens I swear,
     Aurora shall not peep out of her doors,
     But I will have Cosroe by the head,
     And kill proud Tamburlaine with point of sword.
     Tell you the rest, Meander:  I have said.

     MEANDER. Then, having pass'd Armenian deserts now,
     And pitch'd our tents under the Georgian hills,
     Whose tops are cover'd with Tartarian thieves,
     That lie in ambush, waiting for a prey,
     What should we do but bid them battle straight,
     And rid the world of those detested troops?
     Lest, if we let them linger here a while,
     They gather strength by power of fresh supplies.
     This country swarms with vile outragious men
     That live by rapine and by lawless spoil,
     Fit soldiers for the [75] wicked Tamburlaine;
     And he that could with gifts and promises
     Inveigle him that led a thousand horse,
     And make him false his faith unto his [76] king,
     Will quickly win such as be [77] like himself.
     Therefore cheer up your minds; prepare to fight:
     He that can take or slaughter Tamburlaine,
     Shall rule the province of Albania;
     Who brings that traitor's head, Theridamas,
     Shall have a government in Media,
     Beside [78] the spoil of him and all his train:
     But, if Cosroe (as our spials say,
     And as we know) remains with Tamburlaine,
     His highness' pleasure is that he should live,
     And be reclaim'd with princely lenity.

          Enter a SPY.

     SPY. An hundred horsemen of my company,
     Scouting abroad upon these champion [79] plains,
     Have view'd the army of the Scythians;
     Which make report it far exceeds the king's.

     MEANDER. Suppose they be in number infinite,
     Yet being void of martial discipline,
     All running headlong, greedy after [80] spoils,
     And more regarding gain than victory,
     Like to the cruel brothers of the earth,
     Sprung [81] of the teeth of [82] dragons venomous,
     Their careless swords shall lance [83] their fellows' throats,
     And make us triumph in their overthrow.

     MYCETES. Was there such brethren, sweet Meander, say,
     That sprung of teeth of dragons venomous?

     MEANDER. So poets say, my lord.

     MYCETES. And 'tis a pretty toy to be a poet.
     Well, well, Meander, thou art deeply read;
     And having thee, I have a jewel sure.
     Go on, my lord, and give your charge, I say;
     Thy wit will make us conquerors to-day.

     MEANDER. Then, noble soldiers, to entrap these thieves
     That live confounded in disorder'd troops,
     If wealth or riches may prevail with them,
     We have our camels laden all with gold,
     Which you that be but common soldiers
     Shall fling in every corner of the field;
     And, while the base-born Tartars take it up,
     You, fighting more for honour than for gold,
     Shall massacre those greedy-minded slaves;
     And, when their scatter'd army is subdu'd,
     And you march on their slaughter'd carcasses,
     Share equally the gold that bought their lives,
     And live like gentlemen in Persia.
     Strike up the [84] drum, and march courageously:
     Fortune herself doth sit upon our crests.

     MYCETES. He tells you true, my masters; so he does.--
     Drums, why sound ye not when Meander speaks?

          [Exeunt, drums sounding.]




SCENE III.

          Enter COSROE, TAMBURLAINE, THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES,
     USUMCASANE,
          and ORTYGIUS, with others.

     COSROE. Now, worthy Tamburlaine, have I repos'd
     In thy approved fortunes all my hope.
     What think'st thou, man, shall come of our attempts?
     For, even as from assured oracle,
     I take thy doom for satisfaction.

     TAMBURLAINE. And so mistake you not a whit, my lord;
     For fates and oracles [of] heaven have sworn
     To royalize the deeds of Tamburlaine,
     And make them blest that share in his attempts:
     And doubt you not but, if you favour me,
     And let my fortunes and my valour sway
     To some [85] direction in your martial deeds,
     The world will [86] strive with hosts of men-at-arms
     To swarm unto the ensign I support.
     The host of Xerxes, which by fame is said
     To drink the mighty Parthian Araris,
     Was but a handful to that we will have:
     Our quivering lances, shaking in the air,
     And bullets, like Jove's dreadful thunderbolts,
     Enroll'd in flames and fiery smouldering mists,
     Shall threat the gods more than Cyclopian wars;
     And with our sun-bright armour, as we march,
     We'll chase the stars from heaven, and dim their eyes
     That stand and muse at our admired arms.

     THERIDAMAS. You see, my lord, what working words he hath;
     But, when you see his actions top [87] his speech,
     Your speech will stay, or so extol his worth
     As I shall be commended and excus'd
     For turning my poor charge to his direction:
     And these his two renowmed [88] friends, my lord,
     Would make one thirst [89] and strive to be retain'd
     In such a great degree of amity.

     TECHELLES. With duty and [90] with amity we yield
     Our utmost service to the fair [91] Cosroe.

     COSROE. Which I esteem as portion of my crown.
     Usumcasane and Techelles both,
     When she [92] that rules in Rhamnus' [93] golden gates,
     And makes a passage for all prosperous arms,
     Shall make me solely emperor of Asia,
     Then shall your meeds [94] and valours be advanc'd
     To rooms of honour and nobility.

     TAMBURLAINE. Then haste, Cosroe, to be king alone,
     That I with these my friends and all my men
     May triumph in our long-expected fate.
     The king, your brother, is now hard at hand:
     Meet with the fool, and rid your royal shoulders
     Of such a burden as outweighs the sands
     And all the craggy rocks of Caspia.

          Enter a MESSENGER.

     MESSENGER. My lord,
     We have discovered the enemy
     Ready to charge you with a mighty army.

     COSROE. Come, Tamburlaine; now whet thy winged sword,
     And lift thy lofty arm into [95] the clouds,
     That it may reach the king of Persia's crown,
     And set it safe on my victorious head.

     TAMBURLAINE. See where it is, the keenest curtle-axe
     That e'er made passage thorough Persian arms!
     These are the wings shall make it fly as swift
     As doth the lightning or the breath of heaven,
     And kill as sure [96] as it swiftly flies.

     COSROE. Thy words assure me of kind success:
     Go, valiant soldier, go before, and charge
     The fainting army of that foolish king.

     TAMBURLAINE. Usumcasane and Techelles, come:
     We are enow to scare the enemy,
     And more than needs to make an emperor.

          [Exeunt to the battle.]




SCENE IV.

          Enter MYCETES with his crown in his hand. [97]

     MYCETES. Accurs'd be he that first invented war!
     They knew not, ah, they knew not, simple men,
     How those were [98] hit by pelting cannon-shot
     Stand staggering [99] like a quivering aspen-leaf
     Fearing the force of Boreas' boisterous blasts!
     In what a lamentable case were I,
     If nature had not given me wisdom's lore!
     For kings are clouts that every man shoots at,
     Our crown the pin [100] that thousands seek to cleave:
     Therefore in policy I think it good
     To hide it close; a goodly stratagem,
     And far from any man that is a fool:
     So shall not I be known; or if I be,
     They cannot take away my crown from me.
     Here will I hide it in this simple hole.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE.

     TAMBURLAINE. What, fearful coward, straggling from the camp,
     When kings themselves are present in the field?

     MYCETES. Thou liest.

     TAMBURLAINE. Base villain, darest thou give me [101] the lie?

     MYCETES. Away! I am the king; go; touch me not.
     Thou break'st the law of arms, unless thou kneel,
     And cry me "mercy, noble king!"

     TAMBURLAINE. Are you the witty king of Persia?

     MYCETES. Ay, marry, [102] am I:  have you any suit to me?

     TAMBURLAINE. I would entreat you to speak but three wise words.

     MYCETES. So I can when I see my time.

     TAMBURLAINE. Is this your crown?

     MYCETES. Ay:  didst thou ever see a fairer?

     TAMBURLAINE. You will not sell it, will you?

     MYCETES. Such another word, and I will have thee executed.  Come,
     give it me.

     TAMBURLAINE. No; I took it prisoner.

     MYCETES. You lie; I gave it you.

     TAMBURLAINE. Then 'tis mine.

     MYCETES. No; I mean I let you keep it.

     TAMBURLAINE. Well, I mean you shall have it again.
     Here, take it for a while:  I lend it thee,
     Till I may see thee hemm'd with armed men;
     Then shalt thou see me pull it from thy head:
     Thou art no match for mighty Tamburlaine.

          [Exit.]

     MYCETES. O gods, is this Tamburlaine the thief?
     I marvel much he stole it not away.

          [Trumpets within sound to the battle:  he runs out.]




SCENE V.

          Enter COSROE, TAMBURLAINE, MENAPHON, MEANDER, ORTYGIUS,
          THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE, with others.

     TAMBURLAINE. Hold thee, Cosroe; wear two imperial crowns;
     Think thee invested now as royally,
     Even by the mighty hand of Tamburlaine,
     As if as many kings as could encompass thee
     With greatest pomp had crown'd thee emperor.

     COSROE. So do I, thrice-renowmed man-at-arms; [103]
     And none shall keep the crown but Tamburlaine:
     Thee do I make my regent of Persia,
     And general-lieutenant of my armies.--
     Meander, you, that were our brother's guide,
     And chiefest [104] counsellor in all his acts,
     Since he is yielded to the stroke of war,
     On your submission we with thanks excuse,
     And give you equal place in our affairs.

     MEANDER. Most happy [105] emperor, in humblest terms
     I vow my service to your majesty,
     With utmost virtue of my faith and duty.

     COSROE. Thanks, good Meander.--Then, Cosroe, reign,
     And govern Persia in her former pomp.
     Now send embassage to thy neighbour kings,
     And let them know the Persian king is chang'd,
     From one that knew not what a king should do,
     To one that can command what 'longs thereto.
     And now we will to fair Persepolis
     With twenty thousand expert soldiers.
     The lords and captains of my brother's camp
     With little slaughter take Meander's course,
     And gladly yield them to my gracious rule.--
     Ortygius and Menaphon, my trusty friends,
     Now will I gratify your former good,
     And grace your calling with a greater sway.

     ORTYGIUS. And as we ever aim'd [106] at your behoof,
     And sought your state all honour it [107] deserv'd,
     So will we with our powers and our [108] lives
     Endeavour to preserve and prosper it.

     COSROE. I will not thank thee, sweet Ortygius;
     Better replies shall prove my purposes.--
     And now, Lord Tamburlaine, my brother's camp
     I leave to thee and to Theridamas,
     To follow me to fair Persepolis;
     Then will we [109] march to all those Indian mines
     My witless brother to the Christians lost,
     And ransom them with fame and usury:
     And, till thou overtake me, Tamburlaine,
     (Staying to order all the scatter'd troops,)
     Farewell, lord regent and his happy friends.
     I long to sit upon my brother's throne.

     MEANDER. Your majesty shall shortly have your wish,
     And ride in triumph through Persepolis.

          [Exeunt all except TAMBURLAINE, THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, and
          USUMCASANE.]

     TAMBURLAINE. And ride in triumph through Persepolis!--
     Is it not brave to be a king, Techelles?--
     Usumcasane and Theridamas,
     Is it not passing brave to be a king,
     And ride in triumph through Persepolis?

     TECHELLES. O, my lord, it is sweet and full of pomp!

     USUMCASANE. To be a king is half to be a god.

     THERIDAMAS. A god is not so glorious as a king:
     I think the pleasure they enjoy in heaven,
     Cannot compare with kingly joys in [110] earth;--
     To wear a crown enchas'd with pearl and gold,
     Whose virtues carry with it life and death;
     To ask and have, command and be obey'd;
     When looks breed love, with looks to gain the prize,--
     Such power attractive shines in princes' eyes.

     TAMBURLAINE. Why, say, Theridamas, wilt thou be a king?

     THERIDAMAS. Nay, though I praise it, I can live without it.

     TAMBURLAINE. What say my other friends? will you be kings?

     TECHELLES. I, if I could, with all my heart, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE. Why, that's well said, Techelles:  so would I;--
     And so would you, my masters, would you not?

     USUMCASANE. What, then, my lord?

     TAMBURLAINE. Why, then, Casane, [111] shall we wish for aught
     The world affords in greatest novelty,
     And rest attemptless, faint, and destitute?
     Methinks we should not.  I am strongly mov'd,
     That if I should desire the Persian crown,
     I could attain it with a wondrous ease:
     And would not all our soldiers soon consent,
     If we should aim at such a dignity?

     THERIDAMAS. I know they would with our persuasions.

     TAMBURLAINE. Why, then, Theridamas, I'll first assay
     To get the Persian kingdom to myself;
     Then thou for Parthia; they for Scythia and Media;
     And, if I prosper, all shall be as sure
     As if the Turk, the Pope, Afric, and Greece,
     Came creeping to us with their crowns a-piece. [112]

     TECHELLES. Then shall we send to this triumphing king,
     And bid him battle for his novel crown?

     USUMCASANE. Nay, quickly, then, before his room be hot.

     TAMBURLAINE. 'Twill prove a pretty jest, in faith, my friends.

     THERIDAMAS. A jest to charge on twenty thousand men!
     I judge the purchase [113] more important far.

     TAMBURLAINE. Judge by thyself, Theridamas, not me;
     For presently Techelles here shall haste
     To bid him battle ere he pass too far,
     And lose more labour than the gain will quite: [114]
     Then shalt thou see this [115] Scythian Tamburlaine
     Make but a jest to win the Persian crown.--
     Techelles, take a thousand horse with thee,
     And bid him turn him [116] back to war with us,
     That only made him king to make us sport:
     We will not steal upon him cowardly,
     But give him warning and [117] more warriors:
     Haste thee, Techelles; we will follow thee.

          [Exit TECHELLES.]

     What saith Theridamas?

     THERIDAMAS. Go on, for me.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE VI.

          Enter COSROE, MEANDER, ORTYGIUS, and MENAPHON, with
          SOLDIERS.

     COSROE. What means this devilish shepherd, to aspire
     With such a giantly presumption,
     To cast up hills against the face of heaven,
     And dare the force of angry Jupiter?
     But, as he thrust them underneath the hills,
     And press'd out fire from their burning jaws,
     So will I send this monstrous slave to hell,
     Where flames shall ever feed upon his soul.

     MEANDER. Some powers divine, or else infernal, mix'd
     Their angry seeds at his conception;
     For he was never sprung [118] of human race,
     Since with the spirit of his fearful pride,
     He dares [119] so doubtlessly resolve of rule,
     And by profession be ambitious.

     ORTYGIUS. What god, or fiend, or spirit of the earth,
     Or monster turned to a manly shape,
     Or of what mould or mettle he be made,
     What star or fate [120] soever govern him,
     Let us put on our meet encountering minds;
     And, in detesting such a devilish thief,
     In love of honour and defence of right,
     Be arm'd against the hate of such a foe,
     Whether from earth, or hell, or heaven he grow.

     COSROE. Nobly resolv'd, my good Ortygius;
     And, since we all have suck'd one wholesome air,
     And with the same proportion of elements
     Resolve, [121] I hope we are resembled,
     Vowing our loves to equal death and life.
     Let's cheer our soldiers to encounter him,
     That grievous image of ingratitude,
     That fiery thirster after sovereignty,
     And burn him in the fury of that flame
     That none can quench but blood and empery.
     Resolve, my lords and loving soldiers, now
     To save your king and country from decay.
     Then strike up, drum; and all the stars that make
     The loathsome circle of my dated life,
     Direct my weapon to his barbarous heart,
     That thus opposeth him against the gods,
     And scorns the powers that govern Persia!

          [Exeunt, drums sounding.]




SCENE VII.

          Alarms of battle within.  Then enter COSROE wounded,
          TAMBURLAINE, THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE, with others.

     COSROE. Barbarous [122] and bloody Tamburlaine,
     Thus to deprive me of my crown and life!--
     Treacherous and false Theridamas,
     Even at the morning of my happy state,
     Scarce being seated in my royal throne,
     To work my downfall and untimely end!
     An uncouth pain torments my grieved soul;
     And death arrests the organ of my voice,
     Who, entering at the breach thy sword hath made,
     Sacks every vein and artier [123] of my heart.--
     Bloody and insatiate Tamburlaine!

     TAMBURLAINE. The thirst of reign and sweetness of a crown,
     That caus'd the eldest son of heavenly Ops
     To thrust his doting father from his chair,
     And place himself in the empyreal heaven,
     Mov'd me to manage arms against thy state.
     What better precedent than mighty Jove?
     Nature, that fram'd us of four elements
     Warring within our breasts for regiment, [124]
     Doth teach us all to have aspiring minds:
     Our souls, whose faculties can comprehend
     The wondrous architecture of the world,
     And measure every wandering planet's course,
     Still climbing after knowledge infinite,
     And always moving as the restless spheres,
     Will us to wear ourselves, and never rest,
     Until we reach the ripest fruit [125] of all,
     That perfect bliss and sole felicity,
     The sweet fruition of an earthly crown.

     THERIDAMAS. And that made me to join with Tamburlaine;
     For he is gross and like the massy earth
     That moves not upwards, nor by princely deeds
     Doth mean to soar above the highest sort.

     TECHELLES. And that made us, the friends of Tamburlaine,
     To lift our swords against the Persian king.

     USUMCASANE. For as, when Jove did thrust old Saturn down,
     Neptune and Dis gain'd each of them a crown,
     So do we hope to reign in Asia,
     If Tamburlaine be plac'd in Persia.

     COSROE. The strangest men that ever nature made!
     I know not how to take their tyrannies.
     My bloodless body waxeth chill and cold,
     And with my blood my life slides through my wound;
     My soul begins to take her flight to hell,
     And summons all my senses to depart:
     The heat and moisture, which did feed each other,
     For want of nourishment to feed them both,
     Are [126] dry and cold; and now doth ghastly Death
     With greedy talents [127] gripe my bleeding heart,
     And like a harpy [128] tires on my life.--
     Theridamas and Tamburlaine, I die:
     And fearful vengeance light upon you both!

          [Dies.--TAMBURLAINE takes COSROE'S crown, and puts it on
          his own head.]

     TAMBURLAINE. Not all the curses which the [129] Furies breathe
     Shall make me leave so rich a prize as this.
     Theridamas, Techelles, and the rest,
     Who think you now is king of Persia?

     ALL. Tamburlaine!  Tamburlaine!

     TAMBURLAINE. Though Mars himself, the angry god of arms,
     And all the earthly potentates conspire
     To dispossess me of this diadem,
     Yet will I wear it in despite of them,
     As great commander of this eastern world,
     If you but say that Tamburlaine shall reign.

     ALL. Long live Tamburlaine, and reign in Asia!

     TAMBURLAINE. So; now it is more surer on my head
     Than if the gods had held a parliament,
     And all pronounc'd me king of Persia.

          [Exeunt.]




ACT III.




SCENE I.

          Enter BAJAZETH, the KINGS OF FEZ, MOROCCO, and ARGIER, with
          others, in great pomp.

     BAJAZETH. Great kings of Barbary, and my portly bassoes, [130]
     We hear the Tartars and the eastern thieves,
     Under the conduct of one Tamburlaine,
     Presume a bickering with your emperor,
     And think to rouse us from our dreadful siege
     Of the famous Grecian Constantinople.
     You know our army is invincible;
     As many circumcised Turks we have,
     And warlike bands of Christians renied, [131]
     As hath the ocean or the Terrene [132] sea
     Small drops of water when the moon begins
     To join in one her semicircled horns:
     Yet would we not be brav'd with foreign power,
     Nor raise our siege before the Grecians yield,
     Or breathless lie before the city-walls.

     KING OF FEZ. Renowmed [133] emperor and mighty general,
     What, if you sent the bassoes of your guard
     To charge him to remain in Asia,
     Or else to threaten death and deadly arms
     As from the mouth of mighty Bajazeth?

     BAJAZETH. Hie thee, my basso, [134] fast to Persia;
     Tell him thy lord, the Turkish emperor,
     Dread lord of Afric, Europe, and Asia,
     Great king and conqueror of Graecia,
     The ocean, Terrene, and the Coal-black sea,
     The high and highest monarch of the world,
     Wills and commands, (for say not I entreat,)
     Not [135] once to set his foot in [136] Africa,
     Or spread [137] his colours in Graecia,
     Lest he incur the fury of my wrath:
     Tell him I am content to take a truce,
     Because I hear he bears a valiant mind:
     But if, presuming on his silly power,
     He be so mad to manage arms with me,
     Then stay thou with him,--say, I bid thee so;
     And if, before the sun have measur'd heaven [138]
     With triple circuit, thou regreet us not,
     We mean to take his morning's next arise
     For messenger he will not be reclaim'd,
     And mean to fetch thee in despite of him.

     BASSO. Most great and puissant monarch of the earth,
     Your basso will accomplish your behest,
     And shew your pleasure to the Persian,
     As fits the legate of the stately Turk.

          [Exit.]

     KING OF ARGIER. They say he is the king of Persia;
     But, if he dare attempt to stir your siege,
     'Twere requisite he should be ten times more,
     For all flesh quakes at your magnificence.

     BAJAZETH. True, Argier; and tremble[s] at my looks.

     KING OF MOROCCO. The spring is hinder'd by your smothering host;
     For neither rain can fall upon the earth,
     Nor sun reflex his virtuous beams thereon,
     The ground is mantled with such multitudes.

     BAJAZETH. All this is true as holy Mahomet;
     And all the trees are blasted with our breaths.

     KING OF FEZ. What thinks your greatness best to be achiev'd
     In pursuit of the city's overthrow?

     BAJAZETH. I will the captive pioners [139] of Argier
     Cut off the water that by leaden pipes
     Runs to the city from the mountain Carnon;
     Two thousand horse shall forage up and down,
     That no relief or succour come by land;
     And all the sea my galleys countermand:
     Then shall our footmen lie within the trench,
     And with their cannons, mouth'd like Orcus' gulf,
     Batter the walls, and we will enter in;
     And thus the Grecians shall be conquered.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter ZENOCRATE, AGYDAS, ANIPPE, with others.

     AGYDAS. Madam Zenocrate, may I presume
     To know the cause of these unquiet fits
     That work such trouble to your wonted rest?
     'Tis more than pity such a heavenly face
     Should by heart's sorrow wax so wan and pale,
     When your offensive rape by Tamburlaine
     (Which of your whole displeasures should be most)
     Hath seem'd to be digested long ago.

     ZENOCRATE. Although it be digested long ago,
     As his exceeding favours have deserv'd,
     And might content the Queen of Heaven, as well
     As it hath chang'd my first-conceiv'd disdain;
     Yet since a farther passion feeds my thoughts
     With ceaseless [140] and disconsolate conceits, [141]
     Which dye my looks so lifeless as they are,
     And might, if my extremes had full events,
     Make me the ghastly counterfeit [142] of death.

     AGYDAS. Eternal heaven sooner be dissolv'd,
     And all that pierceth Phoebus' silver eye,
     Before such hap fall to Zenocrate!

     ZENOCRATE. Ah, life and soul, still hover in his [143] breast,
     And leave my body senseless as the earth,
     Or else unite you [144] to his life and soul,
     That I may live and die with Tamburlaine!

          Enter, behind, TAMBURLAINE, with TECHELLES, and others.

     AGYDAS. With Tamburlaine!  Ah, fair Zenocrate,
     Let not a man so vile and barbarous,
     That holds you from your father in despite,
     And keeps you from the honours of a queen,
     (Being suppos'd his worthless concubine,)
     Be honour'd with your love but for necessity!
     So, now the mighty Soldan hears of you,
     Your highness needs not doubt but in short time
     He will, with Tamburlaine's destruction,
     Redeem you from this deadly servitude.

     ZENOCRATE. Leave [145] to wound me with these words,
     And speak of Tamburlaine as he deserves:
     The entertainment we have had of him
     Is far from villany or servitude,
     And might in noble minds be counted princely.

     AGYDAS. How can you fancy one that looks so fierce,
     Only dispos'd to martial stratagems?
     Who, when he shall embrace you in his arms,
     Will tell how many thousand men he slew;
     And, when you look for amorous discourse,
     Will rattle forth his facts [146] of war and blood,
     Too harsh a subject for your dainty ears.

     ZENOCRATE. As looks the sun through Nilus' flowing stream,
     Or when the Morning holds him in her arms,
     So looks my lordly love, fair Tamburlaine;
     His talk much [147] sweeter than the Muses' song
     They sung for honour 'gainst Pierides, [148]
     Or when Minerva did with Neptune strive:
     And higher would I rear my estimate
     Than Juno, sister to the highest god,
     If I were match'd with mighty Tamburlaine.

     AGYDAS. Yet be not so inconstant in your love,
     But let the young Arabian [149] live in hope,
     After your rescue to enjoy his choice.
     You see, though first the king of Persia,
     Being a shepherd, seem'd to love you much,
     Now, in his majesty, he leaves those looks,
     Those words of favour, and those comfortings,
     And gives no more than common courtesies.

     ZENOCRATE. Thence rise the tears that so distain my cheeks,
     Fearing his love [150] through my unworthiness.

          [TAMBURLAINE goes to her, and takes her away lovingly by
          the hand, looking wrathfully on AGYDAS, and says nothing.
          Exeunt all except AGYDAS.]

     AGYDAS. Betray'd by fortune and suspicious love,
     Threaten'd with frowning wrath and jealousy,
     Surpris'd with fear of [151] hideous revenge,
     I stand aghast; but most astonied
     To see his choler shut in secret thoughts,
     And wrapt in silence of his angry soul:
     Upon his brows was pourtray'd ugly death;
     And in his eyes the fury [152] of his heart,
     That shone [153] as comets, menacing revenge,
     And cast a pale complexion on his cheeks.
     As when the seaman sees the Hyades
     Gather an army of Cimmerian clouds,
     (Auster and Aquilon with winged steeds,
     All sweating, tilt about the watery heavens,
     With shivering spears enforcing thunder-claps,
     And from their shields strike flames of lightning,)
     All-fearful folds his sails, and sounds the main,
     Lifting his prayers to the heavens for aid
     Against the terror of the winds and waves;
     So fares Agydas for the late-felt frowns,
     That send [154] a tempest to my daunted thoughts,
     And make my soul divine her overthrow.

          Re-enter TECHELLES with a naked dagger, and USUMCASANE.

     TECHELLES. See you, Agydas, how the king salutes you!
     He bids you prophesy what it imports.

     AGYDAS. I prophesied before, and now I prove
     The killing frowns of jealousy and love.
     He needed not with words confirm my fear,
     For words are vain where working tools present
     The naked action of my threaten'd end:
     It says, Agydas, thou shalt surely die,
     And of extremities elect the least;
     More honour and less pain it may procure,
     To die by this resolved hand of thine
     Than stay the torments he and heaven have sworn.
     Then haste, Agydas, and prevent the plagues
     Which thy prolonged fates may draw on thee:
     Go wander free from fear of tyrant's rage,
     Removed from the torments and the hell
     Wherewith he may excruciate thy soul;
     And let Agydas by Agydas die,
     And with this stab slumber eternally.

          [Stabs himself.]

     TECHELLES. Usumcasane, see, how right the man
     Hath hit the meaning of my lord the king!

     USUMCASANE. Faith, and, Techelles, it was manly done;
     And, since he was so wise and honourable,
     Let us afford him now the bearing hence,
     And crave his triple-worthy burial.

     TECHELLES. Agreed, Casane; we will honour him.

          [Exeunt, bearing out the body.]




SCENE III.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE, THERIDAMAS,
          a BASSO, ZENOCRATE, ANIPPE, with others.

     TAMBURLAINE. Basso, by this thy lord and master knows
     I mean to meet him in Bithynia:
     See, how he comes! tush, Turks are full of brags,
     And menace [155] more than they can well perform.
     He meet me in the field, and fetch [156] thee hence!
     Alas, poor Turk! his fortune is too weak
     T' encounter with the strength of Tamburlaine:
     View well my camp, and speak indifferently;
     Do not my captains and my soldiers look
     As if they meant to conquer Africa?

     BASSO. Your men are valiant, but their number few,
     And cannot terrify his mighty host:
     My lord, the great commander of the world,
     Besides fifteen contributory kings,
     Hath now in arms ten thousand janizaries,
     Mounted on lusty Mauritanian steeds,
     Brought to the war by men of Tripoly;
     Two hundred thousand footmen that have serv'd
     In two set battles fought in Graecia;
     And for the expedition of this war,
     If he think good, can from his garrisons
     Withdraw as many more to follow him.

     TECHELLES. The more he brings, the greater is the spoil;
     For, when they perish by our warlike hands,
     We mean to set [157] our footmen on their steeds,
     And rifle all those stately janizars.

     TAMBURLAINE. But will those kings accompany your lord?

     BASSO. Such as his highness please; but some must stay
     To rule the provinces he late subdu'd.

     TAMBURLAINE. [To his OFFICERS]
     Then fight courageously:  their crowns are yours;
     This hand shall set them on your conquering heads,
     That made me emperor of Asia.

     USUMCASANE. Let him bring millions infinite of men,
     Unpeopling Western Africa and Greece,
     Yet we assure us of the victory.

     THERIDAMAS. Even he, that in a trice vanquish'd two kings
     More mighty than the Turkish emperor,
     Shall rouse him out of Europe, and pursue
     His scatter'd army till they yield or die.

     TAMBURLAINE. Well said, Theridamas! speak in that mood;
     For WILL and SHALL best fitteth Tamburlaine,
     Whose smiling stars give him assured hope
     Of martial triumph ere he meet his foes.
     I that am term'd the scourge and wrath of God,
     The only fear and terror of the world,
     Will first subdue the Turk, and then enlarge
     Those Christian captives which you keep as slaves,
     Burdening their bodies with your heavy chains,
     And feeding them with thin and slender fare;
     That naked row about the Terrene [158] sea,
     And, when they chance to rest or breathe [159] a space,
     Are punish'd with bastones [160] so grievously
     That they [161] lie panting on the galleys' side,
     And strive for life at every stroke they give.
     These are the cruel pirates of Argier,
     That damned train, the scum of Africa,
     Inhabited with straggling runagates,
     That make quick havoc of the Christian blood:
     But, as I live, that town shall curse the time
     That Tamburlaine set foot in Africa.

          Enter BAJAZETH, BASSOES, the KINGS OF FEZ, MOROCCO,
          and ARGIER; ZABINA and EBEA.

     BAJAZETH. Bassoes and janizaries of my guard,
     Attend upon the person of your lord,
     The greatest potentate of Africa.

     TAMBURLAINE. Techelles and the rest, prepare your swords;
     I mean t' encounter with that Bajazeth.

     BAJAZETH. Kings of Fez, Morocco, [162] and Argier,
     He calls me Bajazeth, whom you call lord!
     Note the presumption of this Scythian slave!--
     I tell thee, villain, those that lead my horse
     Have to their names titles [163] of dignity;
     And dar'st thou bluntly call me Bajazeth?

     TAMBURLAINE. And know, thou Turk, that those which lead my horse
     Shall lead thee captive thorough Africa;
     And dar'st thou bluntly call me Tamburlaine?

     BAJAZETH. By Mahomet my kinsman's sepulchre,
     And by the holy Alcoran I swear,
     He shall be made a chaste and lustless eunuch,
     And in my sarell [164] tend my concubines;
     And all his captains, that thus stoutly stand,
     Shall draw the chariot of my emperess,
     Whom I have brought to see their overthrow!

     TAMBURLAINE. By this my sword that conquer'd Persia,
     Thy fall shall make me famous through the world!
     I will not tell thee how I'll [165] handle thee,
     But every common soldier of my camp
     Shall smile to see thy miserable state.

     KING OF FEZ. What means the [166] mighty Turkish emperor,
     To talk with one so base as Tamburlaine?

     KING OF MOROCCO. Ye Moors and valiant men of Barbary.
     How can ye suffer these indignities?

     KING OF ARGIER. Leave words, and let them feel your lances'
     points,
     Which glided through the bowels of the Greeks.

     BAJAZETH. Well said, my stout contributory kings!
     Your threefold army and my hugy [167] host
     Shall swallow up these base-born Persians.

     TECHELLES. Puissant, renowm'd, [168] and mighty Tamburlaine,
     Why stay we thus prolonging of [169] their lives?

     THERIDAMAS. I long to see those crowns won by our swords,
     That we may rule [170] as kings of Africa.

     USUMCASANE. What coward would not fight for such a prize?

     TAMBURLAINE. Fight all courageously, and be you kings:
     I speak it, and my words are oracles.

     BAJAZETH. Zabina, mother of three braver [171] boys
     Than Hercules, that in his infancy
     Did pash [172] the jaws of serpents venomous;
     Whose hands are made to gripe a warlike lance,
     Their shoulders broad for complete armour fit,
     Their limbs more large and of a bigger size
     Than all the brats y-sprung [173] from Typhon's loins;
     Who, when they come unto their father's age,
     Will batter turrets with their manly fists;--
     Sit here upon this royal chair of state,
     And on thy head wear my imperial crown,
     Until I bring this sturdy Tamburlaine
     And all his captains bound in captive chains.

     ZABINA. Such good success happen to Bajazeth!

     TAMBURLAINE. Zenocrate, the loveliest maid alive,
     Fairer than rocks of pearl and precious stone,
     The only paragon of Tamburlaine;
     Whose eyes are brighter than the lamps of heaven,
     And speech more pleasant than sweet harmony;
     That with thy looks canst clear the darken'd sky,
     And calm the rage of thundering Jupiter;
     Sit down by her, adorned with my crown,
     As if thou wert the empress of the world.
     Stir not, Zenocrate, until thou see
     Me march victoriously with all my men,
     Triumphing over him and these his kings,
     Which I will bring as vassals to thy feet;
     Till then, take thou my crown, vaunt of my worth,
     And manage words with her, as we will arms.

     ZENOCRATE. And may my love, the king of Persia,
     Return with victory and free from wound!

     BAJAZETH. Now shalt thou feel the force of Turkish arms,
     Which lately made all Europe quake for fear.
     I have of Turks, Arabians, Moors, and Jews,
     Enough to cover all Bithynia:
     Let thousands die; their slaughter'd carcasses
     Shall serve for walls and bulwarks to the rest;
     And as the heads of Hydra, so my power,
     Subdu'd, shall stand as mighty as before:
     If they should yield their necks unto the sword,
     Thy soldiers' arms could not endure to strike
     So many blows as I have heads for them. [174]
     Thou know'st not, foolish-hardy Tamburlaine,
     What 'tis to meet me in the open field,
     That leave no ground for thee to march upon.

     TAMBURLAINE. Our conquering swords shall marshal us the way
     We use to march upon the slaughter'd foe,
     Trampling their bowels with our horses' hoofs,
     Brave horses bred on the [175] white Tartarian hills
     My camp is like to Julius Caesar's host,
     That never fought but had the victory;
     Nor in Pharsalia was there such hot war
     As these, my followers, willingly would have.
     Legions of spirits, fleeting in the air,
     Direct our bullets and our weapons' points,
     And make your strokes to wound the senseless light; [176]
     And when she sees our bloody colours spread,
     Then Victory begins to take her flight,
     Resting herself upon my milk-white tent.--
     But come, my lords, to weapons let us fall;
     The field is ours, the Turk, his wife, and all.

          [Exit with his followers.]

     BAJAZETH. Come, kings and bassoes, let us glut our swords,
     That thirst to drink the feeble Persians' blood.

          [Exit with his followers.]

     ZABINA. Base concubine, must thou be plac'd by me
     That am the empress of the mighty Turk?

     ZENOCRATE. Disdainful Turkess, and unreverend boss, [177]
     Call'st thou me concubine, that am betroth'd
     Unto the great and mighty Tamburlaine?

     ZABINA. To Tamburlaine, the great Tartarian thief!

     ZENOCRATE. Thou wilt repent these lavish words of thine
     When thy great basso-master and thyself
     Must plead for mercy at his kingly feet,
     And sue to me to be your advocate. [178]

     ZABINA. And sue to thee!  I tell thee, shameless girl,
     Thou shalt be laundress to my waiting-maid.--
     How lik'st thou her, Ebea? will she serve?

     EBEA. Madam, she thinks perhaps she is too fine;
     But I shall turn her into other weeds,
     And make her dainty fingers fall to work.

     ZENOCRATE. Hear'st thou, Anippe, how thy drudge doth talk?
     And how my slave, her mistress, menaceth?
     Both for their sauciness shall be employ'd
     To dress the common soldiers' meat and drink;
     For we will scorn they should come near ourselves.

     ANIPPE. Yet sometimes let your highness send for them
     To do the work my chambermaid disdains.

          [They sound to the battle within.]

     ZENOCRATE. Ye gods and powers that govern Persia,
     And made my lordly love her worthy king,
     Now strengthen him against the Turkish Bajazeth,
     And let his foes, like flocks of fearful roes
     Pursu'd by hunters, fly his angry looks,
     That I may see him issue conqueror!

     ZABINA. Now, Mahomet, solicit God himself,
     And make him rain down murdering shot from heaven,
     To dash the Scythians' brains, and strike them dead,
     That dare [179] to manage arms with him
     That offer'd jewels to thy sacred shrine
     When first he warr'd against the Christians!

          [They sound again to the battle within.]

     ZENOCRATE. By this the Turks lie weltering in their blood,
     And Tamburlaine is lord of Africa.

     ZABINA. Thou art deceiv'd.  I heard the trumpets sound
     As when my emperor overthrew the Greeks,
     And led them captive into Africa.
     Straight will I use thee as thy pride deserves;
     Prepare thyself to live and die my slave.

     ZENOCRATE. If Mahomet should come from heaven and swear
     My royal lord is slain or conquered,
     Yet should he not persuade me otherwise
     But that he lives and will be conqueror.

          Re-enter BAJAZETH, pursued by TAMBURLAINE. [180]

     TAMBURLAINE. Now, king of bassoes, who is conqueror?

     BAJAZETH. Thou, by the fortune of this damned foil. [181]

     TAMBURLAINE. Where are your stout contributory kings?

          Re-enter TECHELLES, THERIDAMAS, and USUMCASANE.

     TECHELLES. We have their crowns; their bodies strow the field.

     TAMBURLAINE. Each man a crown! why, kingly fought, i'faith.
     Deliver them into my treasury.

     ZENOCRATE. Now let me offer to my gracious lord
     His royal crown again so highly won.

     TAMBURLAINE. Nay, take the Turkish crown from her, Zenocrate,
     And crown me emperor of Africa.

     ZABINA. No, Tamburlaine; though now thou gat [182] the best,
     Thou shalt not yet be lord of Africa.

     THERIDAMAS. Give her the crown, Turkess, you were best.

          [Takes it from her.]

     ZABINA. Injurious villains, thieves, runagates,
     How dare you thus abuse my majesty?

     THERIDAMAS. Here, madam, you are empress; she is none.

          [Gives it to ZENOCRATE.]

     TAMBURLAINE. Not now, Theridamas; her time is past:
     The pillars, that have bolster'd up those terms,
     Are faln in clusters at my conquering feet.

     ZABINA. Though he be prisoner, he may be ransom'd.

     TAMBURLAINE. Not all the world shall ransom Bajazeth.

     BAJAZETH. Ah, fair Zabina! we have lost the field;
     And never had the Turkish emperor
     So great a foil by any foreign foe.
     Now will the Christian miscreants be glad,
     Ringing with joy their superstitious bells,
     And making bonfires for my overthrow:
     But, ere I die, those foul idolaters
     Shall make me bonfires with their filthy bones;
     For, though the glory of this day be lost,
     Afric and Greece have garrisons enough
     To make me sovereign of the earth again.

     TAMBURLAINE. Those walled garrisons will I subdue,
     And write myself great lord of Africa:
     So from the East unto the furthest West
     Shall Tamburlaine extend his puissant arm.
     The galleys and those pilling [183] brigandines,
     That yearly sail to the Venetian gulf,
     And hover in the Straits for Christians' wreck,
     Shall lie at anchor in the Isle Asant,
     Until the Persian fleet and men-of-war,
     Sailing along the oriental sea,
     Have fetch'd about the Indian continent,
     Even from Persepolis to Mexico,
     And thence unto the Straits of Jubalter;
     Where they shall meet and join their force in one.
     Keeping in awe the Bay of Portingale,
     And all the ocean by the British [184] shore;
     And by this means I'll win the world at last.

     BAJAZETH. Yet set a ransom on me, Tamburlaine.

     TAMBURLAINE. What, think'st thou Tamburlaine esteems thy gold?
     I'll make the kings of India, ere I die,
     Offer their mines, to sue for peace, to me,
     And dig for treasure to appease my wrath.--
     Come, bind them both, and one lead in the Turk;
     The Turkess let my love's maid lead away,

          [They bind them.]

     BAJAZETH. Ah, villains, dare you touch my sacred arms?--
     O Mahomet!  O sleepy Mahomet!

     ZABINA. O cursed Mahomet, that mak'st us thus
     The slaves to Scythians rude and barbarous!

     TAMBURLAINE. Come, bring them in; and for this happy conquest
     Triumph, and solemnize a martial [185] feast.

          [Exeunt.]




ACT IV.




SCENE I.

          Enter the SOLDAN OF EGYPT, CAPOLIN, LORDS, and a MESSENGER.

     SOLDAN. Awake, ye men of Memphis! [186] hear the clang
     Of Scythian trumpets; hear the basilisks, [187]
     That, roaring, shake Damascus' turrets down!
     The rogue of Volga holds Zenocrate,
     The Soldan's daughter, for his concubine,
     And, with a troop of thieves and vagabonds,
     Hath spread his colours to our high disgrace,
     While you, faint-hearted base Egyptians,
     Lie slumbering on the flowery banks of Nile,
     As crocodiles that unaffrighted rest
     While thundering cannons rattle on their skins.

     MESSENGER. Nay, mighty Soldan, did your greatness see
     The frowning looks of fiery Tamburlaine,
     That with his terror and imperious eyes
     Commands the hearts of his associates,
     It might amaze your royal majesty.

     SOLDAN. Villain, I tell thee, were that Tamburlaine
     As monstrous [188] as Gorgon prince of hell,
     The Soldan would not start a foot from him.
     But speak, what power hath he?

     MESSENGER. Mighty lord,
     Three hundred thousand men in armour clad,
     Upon their prancing steeds, disdainfully
     With wanton paces trampling on the ground;
     Five hundred thousand footmen threatening shot,
     Shaking their swords, their spears, and iron bills,
     Environing their standard round, that stood
     As bristle-pointed as a thorny wood;
     Their warlike engines and munition
     Exceed the forces of their martial men.

     SOLDAN. Nay, could their numbers countervail the stars,
     Or ever-drizzling [189] drops of April showers,
     Or wither'd leaves that autumn shaketh down,
     Yet would the Soldan by his conquering power
     So scatter and consume them in his rage,
     That not a man should [190] live to rue their fall.

     CAPOLIN. So might your highness, had you time to sort
     Your fighting men, and raise your royal host;
     But Tamburlaine by expedition
     Advantage takes of your unreadiness.

     SOLDAN. Let him take all th' advantages he can:
     Were all the world conspir'd to fight for him,
     Nay, were he devil, [191] as he is no man,
     Yet in revenge of fair Zenocrate,
     Whom he detaineth in despite of us,
     This arm should send him down to Erebus,
     To shroud his shame in darkness of the night.

     MESSENGER. Pleaseth your mightiness to understand,
     His resolution far exceedeth all.
     The first day when he pitcheth down his tents,
     White is their hue, and on his silver crest
     A snowy feather spangled-white he bears,
     To signify the mildness of his mind,
     That, satiate with spoil, refuseth blood:
     But, when Aurora mounts the second time,
     As red as scarlet is his furniture;
     Then must his kindled wrath be quench'd with blood,
     Not sparing any that can manage arms:
     But, if these threats move not submission,
     Black are his colours, black pavilion;
     His spear, his shield, his horse, his armour, plumes,
     And jetty feathers, menace death and hell;
     Without respect of sex, degree, or age,
     He razeth all his foes with fire and sword.

     SOLDAN. Merciless villain, peasant, ignorant
     Of lawful arms or martial discipline!
     Pillage and murder are his usual trades:
     The slave usurps the glorious name of war.
     See, Capolin, the fair Arabian king, [192]
     That hath been disappointed by this slave
     Of my fair daughter and his princely love,
     May have fresh warning to go war with us,
     And be reveng'd for her disparagement.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, TECHELLES, THERIDAMAS, USUMCASANE,
          ZENOCRATE, ANIPPE, two MOORS drawing BAJAZETH in a cage,
          and ZABINA following him.

     TAMBURLAINE. Bring out my footstool.

          [They take BAJAZETH out of the cage.]

     BAJAZETH. Ye holy priests of heavenly Mahomet,
     That, sacrificing, slice and cut your flesh,
     Staining his altars with your purple blood,
     Make heaven to frown, and every fixed star
     To suck up poison from the moorish fens,
     And pour it [193] in this glorious tyrant's throat!

     TAMBURLAINE. The chiefest god, first mover of that sphere
     Enchas'd with thousands ever-shining lamps,
     Will sooner burn the glorious frame of heaven
     Than it should [194] so conspire my overthrow.
     But, villain, thou that wishest this [195] to me,
     Fall prostrate on the low disdainful earth,
     And be the footstool of great Tamburlaine,
     That I may rise into [196] my royal throne.

     BAJAZETH. First shalt thou rip my bowels with thy sword,
     And sacrifice my heart [197] to death and hell,
     Before I yield to such a slavery.

     TAMBURLAINE. Base villain, vassal, slave to Tamburlaine,
     Unworthy to embrace or touch the ground
     That bears the honour of my royal weight;
     Stoop, villain, stoop! stoop; [198] for so he bids
     That may command thee piecemeal to be torn,
     Or scatter'd like the lofty cedar-trees
     Struck with the voice of thundering Jupiter.

     BAJAZETH. Then, as I look down to the damned fiends,
     Fiends, look on me! and thou, dread god of hell,
     With ebon sceptre strike this hateful earth,
     And make it swallow both of us at once!

          [TAMBURLAINE gets up on him into his chair.]

     TAMBURLAINE. Now clear the triple region of the air,
     And let the Majesty of Heaven behold
     Their scourge and terror tread on emperors.
     Smile, stars that reign'd at my nativity,
     And dim the brightness of your [199] neighbour lamps;
     Disdain to borrow light of Cynthia!
     For I, the chiefest lamp of all the earth,
     First rising in the east with mild aspect,
     But fixed now in the meridian line,
     Will send up fire to your turning spheres,
     And cause the sun to borrow light of you.
     My sword struck fire from his coat of steel,
     Even in Bithynia, when I took this Turk;
     As when a fiery exhalation,
     Wrapt in the bowels of a freezing cloud,
     Fighting for passage, make[s] the welkin crack,
     And casts a flash of lightning to [200] the earth:
     But, ere I march to wealthy Persia,
     Or leave Damascus and th' Egyptian fields,
     As was the fame of Clymene's brain-sick son
     That almost brent [201] the axle-tree of heaven,
     So shall our swords, our lances, and our shot
     Fill all the air with fiery meteors;
     Then, when the sky shall wax as red as blood,
     It shall be said I made it red myself,
     To make me think of naught but blood and war.

     ZABINA. Unworthy king, that by thy cruelty
     Unlawfully usurp'st the Persian seat,
     Dar'st thou, that never saw an emperor
     Before thou met my husband in the field,
     Being thy captive, thus abuse his state,
     Keeping his kingly body in a cage,
     That roofs of gold and sun-bright palaces
     Should have prepar'd to entertain his grace?
     And treading him beneath thy loathsome feet,
     Whose feet the kings [202] of Africa have kiss'd?

     TECHELLES. You must devise some torment worse, my lord,
     To make these captives rein their lavish tongues.

     TAMBURLAINE. Zenocrate, look better to your slave.

     ZENOCRATE. She is my handmaid's slave, and she shall look
     That these abuses flow not from [203] her tongue.--
     Chide her, Anippe.

     ANIPPE. Let these be warnings, then, for you, [204] my slave,
     How you abuse the person of the king;
     Or else I swear to have you whipt stark nak'd. [205]

     BAJAZETH. Great Tamburlaine, great in my overthrow,
     Ambitious pride shall make thee fall as low,
     For treading on the back of Bajazeth,
     That should be horsed on four mighty kings.

     TAMBURLAINE. Thy names, and titles, and thy dignities [206]
     Are fled from Bajazeth, and remain with me,
     That will maintain it 'gainst a world of kings.--
     Put him in again.

          [They put him into the cage.]

     BAJAZETH. Is this a place for mighty Bajazeth?
     Confusion light on him that helps thee thus!

     TAMBURLAINE. There, whiles [207] he lives, shall Bajazeth be kept;
     And, where I go, be thus in triumph drawn;
     And thou, his wife, shalt [208] feed him with the scraps
     My servitors shall bring thee from my board;
     For he that gives him other food than this,
     Shall sit by him, and starve to death himself:
     This is my mind, and I will have it so.
     Not all the kings and emperors of the earth,
     If they would lay their crowne before my feet,
     Shall ransom him, or take him from his cage:
     The ages that shall talk of Tamburlaine,
     Even from this day to Plato's wondrous year,
     Shall talk how I have handled Bajazeth:
     These Moors, that drew him from Bithynia
     To fair Damascus, where we now remain,
     Shall lead him with us wheresoe'er we go.--
     Techelles, and my loving followers,
     Now may we see Damascus' lofty towers,
     Like to the shadows of Pyramides
     That with their beauties grace [209] the Memphian fields.
     The golden stature [210] of their feather'd bird, [211]
     That spreads her wings upon the city-walls,
     Shall not defend it from our battering shot:
     The townsmen mask in silk and cloth of gold,
     And every house is as a treasury;
     The men, the treasure, and the town are [212] ours.

     THERIDAMAS. Your tents of white now pitch'd before the gates,
     And gentle flags of amity display'd,
     I doubt not but the governor will yield,
     Offering Damascus to your majesty.

     TAMBURLAINE. So shall he have his life, and all the rest:
     But, if he stay until the bloody flag
     Be once advanc'd on my vermilion tent,
     He dies, and those that kept us out so long;
     And, when they see me march in black array,
     With mournful streamers hanging down their heads,
     Were in that city all the world contain'd,
     Not one should scape, but perish by our swords.

     ZENOCRATE. Yet would you have some pity for my sake,
     Because it is my country [213] and my father's.

     TAMBURLAINE. Not for the world, Zenocrate, if I have sworn.--
     Come; bring in the Turk.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Enter SOLDAN, KING OF ARABIA, [214] CAPOLIN, and SOLDIERS,
          with streaming colours.

     SOLDAN. Methinks we march as Meleager did,
     Environed with brave Argolian knights,
     To chase the savage Calydonian [215] boar,
     Or Cephalus, with lusty [216] Theban youths,
     Against the wolf that angry Themis sent
     To waste and spoil the sweet Aonian fields.
     A monster of five hundred thousand heads,
     Compact of rapine, piracy, and spoil,
     The scum of men, the hate and scourge of God,
     Raves in Aegyptia, and annoyeth us:
     My lord, it is the bloody Tamburlaine,
     A sturdy felon, and [217] a base-bred thief,
     By murder raised to the Persian crown,
     That dare control us in our territories.
     To tame the pride of this presumptuous beast,
     Join your Arabians with the Soldan's power;
     Let us unite our royal bands in one,
     And hasten to remove Damascus' siege.
     It is a blemish to the majesty
     And high estate of mighty emperors,
     That such a base usurping vagabond
     Should brave a king, or wear a princely crown.

     KING OF ARABIA. Renowmed [218] Soldan, have you lately heard
     The overthrow of mighty Bajazeth
     About the confines of Bithynia?
     The slavery wherewith he persecutes
     The noble Turk and his great emperess?

     SOLDAN. I have, and sorrow for his bad success;
     But, noble lord of great Arabia,
     Be so persuaded that the Soldan is
     No more dismay'd with tidings of his fall,
     Than in the haven when the pilot stands,
     And views a stranger's ship rent in the winds,
     And shivered against a craggy rock:
     Yet in compassion to his wretched state,
     A sacred vow to heaven and him I make,
     Confirming it with Ibis' holy name, [219]
     That Tamburlaine shall rue the day, the [220] hour,
     Wherein he wrought such ignominious wrong
     Unto the hallow'd person of a prince,
     Or kept the fair Zenocrate so long,
     As concubine, I fear, to feed his lust.

     KING OF ARABIA. Let grief and fury hasten on revenge;
     Let Tamburlaine for his offences feel
     Such plagues as heaven and we can pour on him:
     I long to break my spear upon his crest,
     And prove the weight of his victorious arm;
     For fame, I fear, hath been too prodigal
     In sounding through the world his partial praise.

     SOLDAN. Capolin, hast thou survey'd our powers?

     CAPOLIN. Great emperors of Egypt and Arabia,
     The number of your hosts united is,
     A hundred and fifty thousand horse,
     Two hundred thousand foot, brave men-at-arms,
     Courageous and [221] full of hardiness,
     As frolic as the hunters in the chase
     Of savage beasts amid the desert woods.

     KING OF ARABIA. My mind presageth fortunate success;
     And, Tamburlaine, my spirit doth foresee
     The utter ruin of thy men and thee.

     SOLDAN. Then rear your standards; let your sounding drums
     Direct our soldiers to Damascus' walls.--
     Now, Tamburlaine, the mighty Soldan comes,
     And leads with him the great Arabian king,
     To dim thy baseness and [222] obscurity,
     Famous for nothing but for theft and spoil;
     To raze and scatter thy inglorious crew
     Of Scythians and slavish Persians.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE IV.

          A banquet set out; and to it come TAMBURLAINE all in
          scarlet, ZENOCRATE, THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE,
          BAJAZETH drawn in his cage, ZABINA, and others.

     TAMBURLAINE. Now hang our bloody colours by Damascus,
     Reflexing hues of blood upon their heads,
     While they walk quivering on their city-walls,
     Half-dead for fear before they feel my wrath.
     Then let us freely banquet, and carouse
     Full bowls of wine unto the god of war,
     That means to fill your helmets full of gold,
     And make Damascus' spoils as rich to you
     As was to Jason Colchos' golden fleece.--
     And now, Bajazeth, hast thou any stomach?

     BAJAZETH. Ay, such a stomach, cruel Tamburlaine, as I could
     willingly feed upon thy blood-raw heart.

     TAMBURLAINE. Nay, thine own is easier to come by:  pluck out
     that; and 'twill serve thee and thy wife.--Well, Zenocrate,
     Techelles, and the rest, fall to your victuals.

     BAJAZETH. Fall to, and never may your meat digest!--
     Ye Furies, that can mask [223] invisible,
     Dive to the bottom of Avernus' pool,
     And in your hands bring hellish poison up,
     And squeeze it in the cup of Tamburlaine!
     Or, winged snakes of Lerna, cast your stings,
     And leave your venoms in this tyrant's dish?

     ZABINA. And may this banquet prove as ominous
     As Progne's to th' adulterous Thracian king
     That fed upon the substance of his child!

     ZENOCRATE. My lord, [224] how can you suffer these
     Outrageous curses by these slaves of yours?

     TAMBURLAINE. To let them see, divine Zenocrate,
     I glory in the curses of my foes,
     Having the power from the empyreal heaven
     To turn them all upon their proper heads.

     TECHELLES. I pray you, give them leave, madam; this speech
     is a goodly refreshing for them. [225]

     THERIDAMAS. But, if his highness would let them be fed,
     it would do them more good.

     TAMBURLAINE. Sirrah, why fall you not to? are you so daintily
     brought up, you cannot eat your own flesh?

     BAJAZETH. First, legions of devils shall tear thee in pieces.

     USUMCASANE. Villain, knowest thou to whom thou speakest?

     TAMBURLAINE. O, let him alone.--Here; [226] eat, sir; take it
     from [227] my sword's point, or I'll thrust it to thy heart.

          [BAJAZETH takes the food, and stamps upon it.]

     THERIDAMAS. He stamps it under his feet, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE. Take it up, villain, and eat it; or I will make thee
     slice [228] the brawns of thy arms into carbonadoes and eat them.

     USUMCASANE. Nay, 'twere better he killed his wife, and then she
     shall be sure not to be starved, and he be provided for a month's
     victual beforehand.

     TAMBURLAINE. Here is my dagger:  despatch her while she is fat;
     for, if she live but a while longer, she will fall [229] into a
     consumption with fretting, and then she will not be worth the
     eating.

     THERIDAMAS. Dost thou think that Mahomet will suffer this?

     TECHELLES. 'Tis like he will, when he cannot let [230] it.

     TAMBURLAINE. Go to; fall to your meat.  What, not a bit!--Belike
     he hath not been watered to-day:  give him some drink.

          [They give BAJAZETH water to drink, and he flings it on
          the ground.]

     Fast, and welcome, sir, while [231] hunger make you eat.--How now,
     Zenocrate! doth not the Turk and his wife make a goodly show at a
     banquet?

     ZENOCRATE. Yes, my lord.

     THERIDAMAS.
     Methinks 'tis a great deal better than a consort [232] of music.

     TAMBURLAINE. Yet music would do well to cheer up Zenocrate.
     Pray thee, tell why art thou so sad? if thou wilt have a song,
     the Turk shall strain his voice:  but why is it?

     ZENOCRATE. My lord, to see my father's town besieg'd,
     The country wasted where myself was born,
     How can it but afflict my very soul?
     If any love remain in you, my lord,
     Or if my love unto your majesty
     May merit favour at your highness' hands,
     Then raise your siege from fair Damascus' walls,
     And with my father take a friendly truce.

     TAMBURLAINE. Zenocrate, were Egypt Jove's own land,
     Yet would I with my sword make Jove to stoop.
     I will confute those blind geographers
     That make a triple region in the world,
     Excluding regions which I mean to trace,
     And with this pen [233] reduce them to a map,
     Calling the provinces, cities, and towns,
     After my name and thine, Zenocrate:
     Here at Damascus will I make the point
     That shall begin the perpendicular:
     And wouldst thou have me buy thy father's love
     With such a loss? tell me, Zenocrate.

     ZENOCRATE. Honour still wait on happy Tamburlaine!
     Yet give me leave to plead for him, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE. Content thyself:  his person shall be safe,
     And all the friends of fair Zenocrate,
     If with their lives they will be pleas'd to yield,
     Or may be forc'd to make me emperor;
     For Egypt and Arabia must be mine.--
     Feed, you slave; thou mayst think thyself happy to be fed from
     my trencher.

     BAJAZETH. My empty stomach, full of idle heat,
     Draws bloody humours from my feeble parts,
     Preserving life by hastening [234] cruel death.
     My veins are pale; my sinews hard and dry;
     My joints benumb'd; unless I eat, I die.

     ZABINA. Eat, Bajazeth; let us live in spite of them, looking
     some happy power will pity and enlarge us.

     TAMBURLAINE. Here, Turk; wilt thou have a clean trencher?

     BAJAZETH. Ay, tyrant, and more meat.

     TAMBURLAINE. Soft, sir! you must be dieted; too much eating
     will make you surfeit.

     THERIDAMAS. So it would, my lord, 'specially [235] having so small
     a walk and so little exercise.

          [A second course is brought in of crowns.]

     TAMBURLAINE. Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane, here are the
     cates you desire to finger, are they not?

     THERIDAMAS. Ay, my lord:  but none save kings must feed with
     these.

     TECHELLES. 'Tis enough for us to see them, and for Tamburlaine
     only to enjoy them.

     TAMBURLAINE. Well; here is now to the Soldan of Egypt, the King
     of Arabia, and the Governor of Damascus.   Now, take these three
     crowns, and pledge me, my contributory kings.  I crown you here,
     Theridamas, king of Argier; Techelles, king of Fez; and
     Usumcasane, king of Morocco. [236]--How say you to this, Turk? these are
     not your contributory kings.

     BAJAZETH. Nor shall they long be thine, I warrant them.

     TAMBURLAINE. Kings of Argier, Morocco, and of Fez,
     You that have march'd with happy Tamburlaine
     As far as from the frozen plage [237] of heaven
     Unto the watery Morning's ruddy bower,
     And thence by land unto the torrid zone,
     Deserve these titles I endow you with
     By valour [238] and by magnanimity.
     Your births shall be no blemish to your fame;
     For virtue is the fount whence honour springs,
     And they are worthy she investeth kings.

     THERIDAMAS. And, since your highness hath so well vouchsaf'd,
     If we deserve them not with higher meeds
     Than erst our states and actions have retain'd,
     Take them away again, [239] and make us slaves.

     TAMBURLAINE. Well said, Theridamas:  when holy Fates
     Shall stablish me in strong Aegyptia,
     We mean to travel to th' antarctic pole,
     Conquering the people underneath our feet,
     And be renowm'd [240] as never emperors were.--
     Zenocrate, I will not crown thee yet,
     Until with greater honours I be grac'd.

          [Exeunt.]




ACT V.




SCENE I.

          Enter the GOVERNOR OF DAMASCUS [241] with three or four
          CITIZENS, and four VIRGINS with branches of laurel in
          their hands.

     GOVERNOR. Still doth this man, or rather god of war,
     Batter our walls and beat our turrets down;
     And to resist with longer stubbornness,
     Or hope of rescue from the Soldan's power,
     Were but to bring our wilful overthrow,
     And make us desperate of our threaten'd lives.
     We see his tents have now been altered
     With terrors to the last and cruel'st hue;
     His coal-black colours, every where advanc'd,
     Threaten our city with a general spoil;
     And, if we should with common rites of arms
     Offer our safeties to his clemency,
     I fear the custom proper to his sword,
     Which he observes as parcel of his fame,
     Intending so to terrify the world,
     By any innovation or remorse [242]
     Will never be dispens'd with till our deaths.
     Therefore, for these our harmless virgins' sakes, [243]
     Whose honours and whose lives rely on him,
     Let us have hope that their unspotted prayers,
     Their blubber'd [244] cheeks, and hearty humble moans,
     Will melt his fury into some remorse,
     And use us like a loving conqueror. [245]

     FIRST VIRGIN. If humble suite or imprecations
     (Utter'd with tears of wretchedness and blood
     Shed from the heads and hearts of all our sex,
     Some made your wives, and some your children,)
     Might have entreated your obdurate breasts
     To entertain some care [246] of our securities
     Whiles only danger beat upon our walls,
     These more than dangerous warrants of our death
     Had never been erected as they be,
     Nor you depend on such weak helps [247] as we.

     GOVERNOR. Well, lovely virgins, think our country's care,
     Our love of honour, loath to be enthrall'd
     To foreign powers and rough imperious yokes,
     Would not with too much cowardice or [248] fear,
     Before all hope of rescue were denied,
     Submit yourselves and us to servitude.
     Therefore, in that your safeties and our own,
     Your honours, liberties, and lives were weigh'd
     In equal care and balance with our own,
     Endure as we the malice of our stars,
     The wrath of Tamburlaine and power [249] of wars;
     Or be the means the overweighing heavens
     Have kept to qualify these hot extremes,
     And bring us pardon in your cheerful looks.

     SECOND VIRGIN. Then here, before the Majesty of Heaven
     And holy patrons of Aegyptia,
     With knees and hearts submissive we entreat
     Grace to our words and pity to our looks,
     That this device may prove propitious,
     And through the eyes and ears of Tamburlaine
     Convey events of mercy to his heart;
     Grant that these signs of victory we yield
     May bind the temples of his conquering head,
     To hide the folded furrows of his brows,
     And shadow his displeased countenance
     With happy looks of ruth and lenity.
     Leave us, my lord, and loving countrymen:
     What simple virgins may persuade, we will.

     GOVERNOR. Farewell, sweet virgins, on whose safe return
     Depends our city, liberty, and lives.

          [Exeunt all except the VIRGINS.]

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, all in black and very melancholy,
          TECHELLES, THERIDAMAS, USUMCASANE, with others.

     TAMBURLAINE. What, are the turtles fray'd out of their nests?
     Alas, poor fools, must you be first shall feel
     The sworn destruction of Damascus?
     They knew [250] my custom; could they not as well
     Have sent ye out when first my milk-white flags,
     Through which sweet Mercy threw her gentle beams,
     Reflexed [251] them on their [252] disdainful eyes,
     As [253] now when fury and incensed hate
     Flings slaughtering terror from my coal-black tents, [254]
     And tells for truth submission [255] comes too late?

     FIRST VIRGIN. Most happy king and emperor of the earth,
     Image of honour and nobility,
     For whom the powers divine have made the world,
     And on whose throne the holy Graces sit;
     In whose sweet person is compris'd the sum
     Of Nature's skill and heavenly majesty;
     Pity our plights!  O, pity poor Damascus!
     Pity old age, within whose silver hairs
     Honour and reverence evermore have reign'd!
     Pity the marriage-bed, where many a lord,
     In prime and glory of his loving joy,
     Embraceth now with tears of ruth and [256] blood
     The jealous body of his fearful wife,
     Whose cheeks and hearts, so punish'd with conceit, [257]
     To think thy puissant never-stayed arm
     Will part their bodies, and prevent their souls
     From heavens of comfort yet their age might bear,
     Now wax all pale and wither'd to the death,
     As well for grief our ruthless governor
     Hath [258] thus refus'd the mercy of thy hand,
     (Whose sceptre angels kiss and Furies dread,)
     As for their liberties, their loves, or lives!
     O, then, for these, and such as we ourselves,
     For us, for infants, and for all our bloods,
     That never nourish'd [259] thought against thy rule,
     Pity, O, pity, sacred emperor,
     The prostrate service of this wretched town;
     And take in sign thereof this gilded wreath,
     Whereto each man of rule hath given his hand,
     And wish'd, [260] as worthy subjects, happy means
     To be investers of thy royal brows
     Even with the true Egyptian diadem!

     TAMBURLAINE. Virgins, in vain you labour to prevent
     That which mine honour swears shall be perform'd.
     Behold my sword; what see you at the point?

     FIRST VIRGIN. Nothing but fear and fatal steel, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE. Your fearful minds are thick and misty, then,
     For there sits Death; there sits imperious [261] Death,
     Keeping his circuit by the slicing edge.
     But I am pleas'd you shall not see him there;
     He now is seated on my horsemen's spears,
     And on their points his fleshless body feeds.--
     Techelles, straight go charge a few of them
     To charge these dames, and shew my servant Death,
     Sitting in scarlet on their armed spears.

     VIRGINS. O, pity us!

     TAMBURLAINE. Away with them, I say, and shew them Death!
          [The VIRGINS are taken out by TECHELLES and others.]
     I will not spare these proud Egyptians,
     Nor change my martial observations
     For all the wealth of Gihon's golden waves,
     Or for the love of Venus, would she leave
     The angry god of arms and lie with me.
     They have refus'd the offer of their lives,
     And know my customs are as peremptory
     As wrathful planets, death, or destiny.

          Re-enter TECHELLES.

     What, have your horsemen shown the virgins Death?

     TECHELLES. They have, my lord, and on Damascus' walls
     Have hoisted up their slaughter'd carcasses.

     TAMBURLAINE. A sight as baneful to their souls, I think,
     As are Thessalian drugs or mithridate:
     But go, my lords, put the rest to the sword.

          [Exeunt all except TAMBURLAINE.]

     Ah, fair Zenocrate!--divine Zenocrate!
     Fair is too foul an epithet for thee,--
     That in thy passion [262] for thy country's love,
     And fear to see thy kingly father's harm,
     With hair dishevell'd wip'st thy watery cheeks;
     And, like to Flora in her morning's pride,
     Shaking her silver tresses in the air,
     Rain'st on the earth resolved [263] pearl in showers,
     And sprinklest sapphires on thy shining face,
     Where Beauty, mother to the Muses, sits,
     And comments volumes with her ivory pen,
     Taking instructions from thy flowing eyes;
     Eyes, when that Ebena steps to heaven, [264]
     In silence of thy solemn evening's walk,
     Making the mantle of the richest night,
     The moon, the planets, and the meteors, light;
     There angels in their crystal armours fight [265]
     A doubtful battle with my tempted thoughts
     For Egypt's freedom and the Soldan's life,
     His life that so consumes Zenocrate;
     Whose sorrows lay more siege unto my soul
     Than all my army to Damascus' walls;
     And neither Persia's [266] sovereign nor the Turk
     Troubled my senses with conceit of foil
     So much by much as doth Zenocrate.
     What is beauty, saith my sufferings, then?
     If all the pens that ever poets held
     Had fed the feeling of their masters' thoughts,
     And every sweetness that inspir'd their hearts,
     Their minds, and muses on admired themes;
     If all the heavenly quintessence they still [267]
     From their immortal flowers of poesy,
     Wherein, as in a mirror, we perceive
     The highest reaches of a human wit;
     If these had made one poem's period,
     And all combin'd in beauty's worthiness,
     Yet should there hover in their restless heads
     One thought, one grace, one wonder, at the least,
     Which into words no virtue can digest.
     But how unseemly is it for my sex,
     My discipline of arms and chivalry,
     My nature, and the terror of my name,
     To harbour thoughts effeminate and faint!
     Save only that in beauty's just applause,
     With whose instinct the soul of man is touch'd;
     And every warrior that is rapt with love
     Of fame, of valour, and of victory,
     Must needs have beauty beat on his conceits:
     I thus conceiving, [268] and subduing both,
     That which hath stoop'd the chiefest of the gods,
     Even from the fiery-spangled veil of heaven,
     To feel the lovely warmth of shepherds' flames,
     And mask in cottages of strowed reeds,
     Shall give the world to note, for all my birth,
     That virtue solely is the sum of glory,
     And fashions men with true nobility.--
     Who's within there?

          Enter ATTENDANTS.

     Hath Bajazeth been fed to-day?

     ATTEND. [269] Ay, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE. Bring him forth; and let us know if the town be
     ransacked.

          [Exeunt ATTENDANTS.]

          Enter TECHELLES, THERIDAMAS, USUMCASANE, and others.

     TECHELLES. The town is ours, my lord, and fresh supply
     Of conquest and of spoil is offer'd us.

     TAMBURLAINE. That's well, Techelles.  What's the news?

     TECHELLES. The Soldan and the Arabian king together
     March on us with [270] such eager violence
     As if there were no way but one with us. [271]

     TAMBURLAINE. No more there is not, I warrant thee, Techelles.

          ATTENDANTS bring in BAJAZETH in his cage, followed by
          ZABINA.
          Exeunt ATTENDANTS.

     THERIDAMAS. We know the victory is ours, my lord;
     But let us save the reverend Soldan's life
     For fair Zenocrate that so laments his state.

     TAMBURLAINE. That will we chiefly see unto, Theridamas,
     For sweet Zenocrate, whose worthiness
     Deserves a conquest over every heart.--
     And now, my footstool, if I lose the field,
     You hope of liberty and restitution?--
     Here let him stay, my masters, from the tents,
     Till we have made us ready for the field.--
     Pray for us, Bajazeth; we are going.
          [Exeunt all except BAJAZETH and ZABINA.]

     BAJAZETH. Go, never to return with victory!
     Millions of men encompass thee about,
     And gore thy body with as many wounds!
     Sharp forked arrows light upon thy horse!
     Furies from the black Cocytus' lake,
     Break up the earth, and with their fire-brands
     Enforce thee run upon the baneful pikes!
     Vollies of shot pierce through thy charmed skin,
     And every bullet dipt in poison'd drugs!
     Or roaring cannons sever all thy joints,
     Making thee mount as high as eagles soar!

     ZABINA. Let all the swords and lances in the field
     Stick in his breast as in their proper rooms!
     At every pore [272] let blood come dropping forth,
     That lingering pains may massacre his heart,
     And madness send his damned soul to hell!

     BAJAZETH. Ah, fair Zabina! we may curse his power,
     The heavens may frown, the earth for anger quake;
     But such a star hath influence in [273] his sword
     As rules the skies and countermands the gods
     More than Cimmerian Styx or Destiny:
     And then shall we in this detested guise,
     With shame, with hunger, and with horror stay, [274]
     Griping our bowels with retorqued [275] thoughts,
     And have no hope to end our ecstasies.

     ZABINA. Then is there left no Mahomet, no God,
     No fiend, no fortune, nor no hope of end
     To our infamous, monstrous slaveries.
     Gape, earth, and let the fiends infernal view
     A [276] hell as hopeless and as full of fear
     As are the blasted banks of Erebus,
     Where shaking ghosts with ever-howling groans
     Hover about the ugly ferryman,
     To get a passage to Elysium! [277]
     Why should we live?--O, wretches, beggars, slaves!--
     Why live we, Bajazeth, and build up nests
     So high within the region of the air,
     By living long in this oppression,
     That all the world will see and laugh to scorn
     The former triumphs of our mightiness
     In this obscure infernal servitude?

     BAJAZETH. O life, more loathsome to my vexed thoughts [278]
     Than noisome parbreak [279] of the Stygian snakes,
     Which fills the nooks of hell with standing air,
     Infecting all the ghosts with cureless griefs!
     O dreary engines of my loathed sight,
     That see my crown, my honour, and my name
     Thrust under yoke and thraldom of a thief,
     Why feed ye still on day's accursed beams,
     And sink not quite into my tortur'd soul?
     You see my wife, my queen, and emperess,
     Brought up and propped by the hand of Fame,
     Queen of fifteen contributory queens,
     Now thrown to rooms of black abjection, [280]
     Smeared with blots of basest drudgery,
     And villainess [281] to shame, disdain, and misery.
     Accursed Bajazeth, whose words of ruth, [282]
     That would with pity cheer Zabina's heart,
     And make our souls resolve [283] in ceaseless tears,
     Sharp hunger bites upon and gripes the root
     From whence the issues of my thoughts do break!
     O poor Zabina!  O my queen, my queen!
     Fetch me some water for my burning breast,
     To cool and comfort me with longer date,
     That, in the shorten'd sequel of my life,
     I may pour forth my soul into thine arms
     With words of love, whose moaning intercourse
     Hath hitherto been stay'd with wrath and hate
     Of our expressless bann'd [284] inflictions.

     ZABINA. Sweet Bajazeth, I will prolong thy life
     As long as any blood or spark of breath
     Can quench or cool the torments of my grief.

          [Exit.]

     BAJAZETH. Now, Bajazeth, abridge thy baneful days,
     And beat the [285] brains out of thy conquer'd head,
     Since other means are all forbidden me,
     That may be ministers of my decay.
     O highest lamp of ever-living [286] Jove,
     Accursed day, infected with my griefs,
     Hide now thy stained face in endless night,
     And shut the windows of the lightsome heavens!
     Let ugly Darkness with her rusty coach,
     Engirt with tempests, wrapt in pitchy clouds,
     Smother the earth with never-fading mists,
     And let her horses from their nostrils breathe
     Rebellious winds and dreadful thunder-claps,
     That in this terror Tamburlaine may live,
     And my pin'd soul, resolv'd in liquid air,
     May still excruciate his tormented thoughts!
     Then let the stony dart of senseless cold
     Pierce through the centre of my wither'd heart,
     And make a passage for my loathed life!

          [He brains himself against the cage.]

          Re-enter ZABINA.

     ZABINA. What do mine eyes behold? my husband dead!
     His skull all riven in twain! his brains dash'd out,
     The brains of Bajazeth, my lord and sovereign!
     O Bajazeth, my husband and my lord!
     O Bajazeth!  O Turk!  O emperor!
     Give him his liquor? not I.  Bring milk and fire, and my blood
     I bring him again.--Tear me in pieces--give [287] me the sword
     with a ball of wild-fire upon it.--Down with him! down with
     him!--Go to my child; away, away, away! ah, save that infant!
     save him, save him!--I, even I, speak to her. [288]--The sun was
     down--streamers white, red, black--Here, here, here!--Fling the
     meat in his face--Tamburlaine, Tamburlaine!--Let the soldiers be
     buried.--Hell, death, Tamburlaine, [289] hell!--Make ready my
     coach, [290] my chair, my jewels.--I come, I come, I come! [291]

          [She runs against the cage, and brains herself.]

          Enter ZENOCRATE with ANIPPE.

     ZENOCRATE. Wretched Zenocrate! that liv'st to see
     Damascus' walls dy'd with Egyptians' [292] blood,
     Thy father's subjects and thy countrymen;
     The [293] streets strow'd with dissever'd joints of men,
     And wounded bodies gasping yet for life;
     But most accurs'd, to see the sun-bright troop
     Of heavenly virgins and unspotted maids
     (Whose looks might make the angry god of arms
     To break his sword and mildly treat of love)
     On horsemen's lances to be hoisted up,
     And guiltlessly endure a cruel death;
     For every fell and stout Tartarian steed,
     That stamp'd on others with their thundering hoofs,
     When all their riders charg'd their quivering spears,
     Began to check the ground and rein themselves,
     Gazing upon the beauty of their looks.
     Ah, Tamburlaine, wert thou the cause of this,
     That term'st Zenocrate thy dearest love?
     Whose lives were dearer to Zenocrate
     Than her own life, or aught save thine own love.
     But see, another bloody spectacle!
     Ah, wretched eyes, the enemies of my heart,
     How are ye glutted with these grievous objects,
     And tell my soul more tales of bleeding ruth!--
     See, see, Anippe, if they breathe or no.

     ANIPPE. No breath, nor sense, nor motion, in them both:
     Ah, madam, this their slavery hath enforc'd,
     And ruthless cruelty of Tamburlaine!

     ZENOCRATE. Earth, cast up fountains from thy [294] entrails,
     And wet thy cheeks for their untimely deaths;
     Shake with their weight in sign of fear and grief!
     Blush, heaven, that gave them honour at their birth,
     And let them die a death so barbarous!
     Those that are proud of fickle empery
     And place their chiefest good in earthly pomp,
     Behold the Turk and his great emperess!
     Ah, Tamburlaine my love, sweet Tamburlaine,
     That fight'st for sceptres and for slippery crowns,
     Behold the Turk and his great emperess!
     Thou that, in conduct of thy happy stars,
     Sleep'st every night with conquest on thy brows,
     And yet wouldst shun the wavering turns of war, [295]
     In fear and feeling of the like distress
     Behold the Turk and his great emperess!
     Ah, mighty Jove and holy Mahomet,
     Pardon my love!  O, pardon his contempt
     Of earthly fortune and respect of pity;
     And let not conquest, ruthlessly pursu'd,
     Be equally against his life incens'd
     In this great Turk and hapless emperess!
     And pardon me that was not mov'd with ruth
     To see them live so long in misery!--
     Ah, what may chance to thee, Zenocrate?

     ANIPPE. Madam, content yourself, and be resolv'd
     Your love hath Fortune so at his command,
     That she shall stay, and turn her wheel no more,
     As long as life maintains his mighty arm
     That fights for honour to adorn your head.

          Enter PHILEMUS.

     ZENOCRATE. What other heavy news now brings Philemus?

     PHILEMUS. Madam, your father, and the Arabian king,
     The first affecter of your excellence,
     Come [296] now, as Turnus 'gainst Aeneas did,
     Armed [297] with lance into the Aegyptian fields,
     Ready for battle 'gainst my lord the king.

     ZENOCRATE. Now shame and duty, love and fear present
     A thousand sorrows to my martyr'd soul.
     Whom should I wish the fatal victory,
     When my poor pleasures are divided thus,
     And rack'd by duty from my cursed heart?
     My father and my first-betrothed love
     Must fight against my life and present love;
     Wherein the change I use condemns my faith,
     And makes my deeds infamous through the world:
     But, as the gods, to end the Trojans' toil,
     Prevented Turnus of Lavinia,
     And fatally enrich'd Aeneas' love,
     So, for a final [298] issue to my griefs,
     To pacify my country and my love,
     Must Tamburlaine by their resistless powers,
     With virtue of a gentle victory,
     Conclude a league of honour to my hope;
     Then, as the powers divine have pre-ordain'd,
     With happy safety of my father's life
     Send like defence of fair Arabia

          [They sound to the battle within; and TAMBURLAINE enjoys
          the victory:  after which, the KING OF ARABIA [299] enters
          wounded.]

     KING OF ARABIA. What cursed power guides the murdering hands
     Of this infamous tyrant's soldiers,
     That no escape may save their enemies,
     Nor fortune keep themselves from victory?
     Lie down, Arabia, wounded to the death,
     And let Zenocrate's fair eyes behold,
     That, as for her thou bear'st these wretched arms,
     Even so for her thou diest in these arms,
     Leaving thy [300] blood for witness of thy love.

     ZENOCRATE. Too dear a witness for such love, my lord!
     Behold Zenocrate, the cursed object
     Whose fortunes never mastered her griefs;
     Behold her wounded in conceit [301] for thee,
     As much as thy fair body is for me!

     KING OF ARABIA. Then shall I die with full contented heart,
     Having beheld divine Zenocrate,
     Whose sight with joy would take away my life
     As now it bringeth sweetness to my wound,
     If I had not been wounded as I am.
     Ah, that the deadly pangs I suffer now
     Would lend an hour's licence to my tongue,
     To make discourse of some sweet accidents
     Have chanc'd thy merits in this worthless bondage,
     And that I might be privy to the state
     Of thy deserv'd contentment and thy love!
     But, making now a virtue of thy sight,
     To drive all sorrow from my fainting soul,
     Since death denies me further cause of joy,
     Depriv'd of care, my heart with comfort dies,
     Since thy desired hand shall close mine eyes.

          [Dies.]

          Re-enter TAMBURLAINE, leading the SOLDAN; TECHELLES,
          THERIDAMAS, USUMCASANE, with others.

     TAMBURLAINE. Come, happy father of Zenocrate,
     A title higher than thy Soldan's name.
     Though my right hand have [302] thus enthralled thee,
     Thy princely daughter here shall set thee free;
     She that hath calm'd the fury of my sword,
     Which had ere this been bath'd in streams of blood
     As vast and deep as Euphrates [303] or Nile.

     ZENOCRATE. O sight thrice-welcome to my joyful soul,
     To see the king, my father, issue safe
     From dangerous battle of my conquering love!

     SOLDAN. Well met, my only dear Zenocrate,
     Though with the loss of Egypt and my crown!

     TAMBURLAINE. 'Twas I, my lord, that gat the victory;
     And therefore grieve not at your overthrow,
     Since I shall render all into your hands,
     And add more strength to your dominions
     Than ever yet confirm'd th' Egyptian crown.
     The god of war resigns his room to me,
     Meaning to make me general of the world:
     Jove, viewing me in arms, looks pale and wan,
     Fearing my power should [304] pull him from his throne:
     Where'er I come the Fatal Sisters sweat, [305]
     And grisly Death, by running to and fro,
     To do their ceaseless homage to my sword:
     And here in Afric, where it seldom rains,
     Since I arriv'd with my triumphant host,
     Have swelling clouds, drawn from wide-gaping [306] wounds,
     Been oft resolv'd [307] in bloody purple showers,
     A meteor that might terrify the earth,
     And make it quake at every drop it drinks:
     Millions [308] of souls sit on the banks of Styx,
     Waiting the back-return of Charon's boat;
     Hell and Elysium [309] swarm with ghosts of men
     That I have sent from sundry foughten fields
     To spread my fame through hell and up to heaven:
     And see, my lord, a sight of strange import,--
     Emperors and kings lie breathless at my feet;
     The Turk and his great empress, as it seems,
     Left to themselves while we were at the fight,
     Have desperately despatch'd their slavish lives:
     With them Arabia, too, hath left his life:
     All sights of power to grace my victory;
     And such are objects fit for Tamburlaine,
     Wherein, as in a mirror, may be seen
     His honour, that consists in shedding blood
     When men presume to manage arms with him.

     SOLDAN. Mighty hath God and Mahomet made thy hand,
     Renowmed [310] Tamburlaine, to whom all kings
     Of force must yield their crowns and emperies;
     And I am pleas'd with this my overthrow,
     If, as beseems a person of thy state,
     Thou hast with honour us'd Zenocrate.

     TAMBURLAINE. Her state and person want no pomp, you see;
     And for all blot of foul inchastity,
     I record [311] heaven, her heavenly self is clear:
     Then let me find no further time [312] to grace
     Her princely temples with the Persian crown;
     But here these kings that on my fortunes wait,
     And have been crown'd for proved worthiness
     Even by this hand that shall establish them,
     Shall now, adjoining all their hands with mine,
     Invest her here the [313] Queen of Persia
     What saith the noble Soldan, and Zenocrate?

     SOLDAN. I yield with thanks and protestations
     Of endless honour to thee for her love.

     TAMBURLAINE. Then doubt I not [314] but fair Zenocrate
     Will soon consent to satisfy us both.

     ZENOCRATE. Else [315] should I much forget myself, my lord.

     THERIDAMAS. Then let us set the crown upon her head,
     That long hath linger'd for so high a seat.

     TECHELLES. My hand is ready to perform the deed;
     For now her marriage-time shall work us rest.

     USUMCASANE. And here's the crown, my lord; help set it on. [316]

     TAMBURLAINE. Then sit thou down, divine Zenocrate;
     And here we crown thee Queen of Persia,
     And all the kingdoms and dominions
     That late the power of Tamburlaine subdu'd.
     As Juno, when the giants were suppress'd,
     That darted mountains at her brother Jove,
     So looks my love, shadowing in her brows
     Triumphs and trophies for my victories;
     Or as Latona's daughter, bent to arms,
     Adding more courage to my conquering mind.
     To gratify the[e], sweet Zenocrate,
     Egyptians, Moors, and men of Asia,
     From Barbary unto the Western India,
     Shall pay a yearly tribute to thy sire;
     And from the bounds of Afric to the banks
     Of Ganges shall his mighty arm extend.--
     And now, my lords and loving followers,
     That purchas'd kingdoms by your martial deeds,
     Cast off your armour, put on scarlet robes,
     Mount up your royal places of estate,
     Environed with troops of noblemen,
     And there make laws to rule your provinces:
     Hang up your weapons on Alcides' post[s];
     For Tamburlaine takes truce with all the world.--
     Thy first-betrothed love, Arabia,
     Shall we with honour, as beseems, [317] entomb
     With this great Turk and his fair emperess.
     Then, after all these solemn exequies,
     We will our rites [318] of marriage solemnize.

          [Exeunt.]

The Second Part of Tamburlaine the Great.
Concerning the old eds., see the prefatory matter
to THE FIRST PART.[a]





THE PROLOGUE.

     The general welcomes Tamburlaine receiv'd,
     When he arrived last upon the [1] stage,
     Have made our poet pen his Second Part,
     Where Death cuts off the progress of his pomp,
     And murderous Fates throw all his triumphs [2] down.
     But what became of fair Zenocrate,
     And with how many cities' sacrifice
     He celebrated her sad [3] funeral,
     Himself in presence shall unfold at large.




DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

     TAMBURLAINE, king of Persia.
     CALYPHAS,  ]
     AMYRAS,    ] his sons.
     CELEBINUS, ]
     THERIDAMAS, king of Argier.
     TECHELLES, king of Fez.
     USUMCASANE, king of Morocco.
     ORCANES, king of Natolia.
     KING OF TREBIZON.
     KING OF SORIA.
     KING OF JERUSALEM.
     KING OF AMASIA.
     GAZELLUS, viceroy of Byron.
     URIBASSA.
     SIGISMUND, King of Hungary.
     FREDERICK, ]
     BALDWIN,   ] Lords of Buda and Bohemia.
     CALLAPINE, son to BAJAZETH, and prisoner to TAMBURLAINE.
     ALMEDA, his keeper.
     GOVERNOR OF BABYLON.
     CAPTAIN OF BALSERA.
     HIS SON.
     ANOTHER CAPTAIN.
     MAXIMUS, PERDICAS, Physicians, Lords, Citizens, Messengers,
     Soldiers, and Attendants.

     ZENOCRATE, wife to TAMBURLAINE.
     OLYMPIA, wife to the CAPTAIN OF BALSERA.
     Turkish Concubines.




THE SECOND PART OF TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT.




ACT I.




SCENE I.

          Enter ORCANES king of Natolia, GAZELLUS viceroy of Byron,
          URIBASSA, [4] and their train, with drums and trumpets.

     ORCANES.  Egregious viceroys of these eastern parts,
     Plac'd by the issue of great Bajazeth,
     And sacred lord, the mighty Callapine,
     Who lives in Egypt prisoner to that slave
     Which kept his father in an iron cage,--
     Now have we march'd from fair Natolia
     Two hundred leagues, and on Danubius' banks
     Our warlike host, in complete armour, rest,
     Where Sigismund, the king of Hungary,
     Should meet our person to conclude a truce:
     What! shall we parle with the Christian?
     Or cross the stream, and meet him in the field?

     GAZELLUS.  King of Natolia, let us treat of peace:
     We all are glutted with the Christians' blood,
     And have a greater foe to fight against,--
     Proud Tamburlaine, that now in Asia,
     Near Guyron's head, doth set his conquering feet,
     And means to fire Turkey as he goes:
     'Gainst him, my lord, you must address your power.

     URIBASSA.  Besides, King Sigismund hath brought from Christendom
     More than his camp of stout Hungarians,--
     Sclavonians, Almains, Rutters, [5] Muffs, and Danes,
     That with the halberd, lance, and murdering axe,
     Will hazard that we might with surety hold.

     ORCANES. [6]  Though from the shortest northern parallel,
     Vast Grantland, compass'd with the Frozen Sea,
     (Inhabited with tall and sturdy men,
     Giants as big as hugy [7] Polypheme,)
     Millions of soldiers cut the [8] arctic line,
     Bringing the strength of Europe to these arms,
     Our Turkey blades shall glide through all their throats,
     And make this champion [9] mead a bloody fen:
     Danubius' stream, that runs to Trebizon,
     Shall carry, wrapt within his scarlet waves,
     As martial presents to our friends at home,
     The slaughter'd bodies of these Christians:
     The Terrene [10] main, wherein Danubius falls,
     Shall by this battle be the bloody sea:
     The wandering sailors of proud Italy
     Shall meet those Christians, fleeting with the tide,
     Beating in heaps against their argosies,
     And make fair Europe, mounted on her bull,
     Trapp'd with the wealth and riches of the world,
     Alight, and wear a woful mourning weed.

     GAZELLUS.  Yet, stout Orcanes, pro-rex of the world,
     Since Tamburlaine hath muster'd all his men,
     Marching from Cairo [11] northward, with his camp,
     To Alexandria and the frontier towns,
     Meaning to make a conquest of our land,
     'Tis requisite to parle for a peace
     With Sigismund, the king of Hungary,
     And save our forces for the hot assaults
     Proud Tamburlaine intends Natolia.

     ORCANES.  Viceroy of Byron, wisely hast thou said.
     My realm, the centre of our empery,
     Once lost, all Turkey would be overthrown;
     And for that cause the Christians shall have peace.
     Sclavonians, Almains, Rutters, Muffs, and Danes,
     Fear [12] not Orcanes, but great Tamburlaine;
     Nor he, but Fortune that hath made him great.
     We have revolted Grecians, Albanese,
     Sicilians, Jews, Arabians, Turks, and Moors,
     Natolians, Sorians, [13] black [14] Egyptians,
     Illyrians, Thracians, and Bithynians, [15]
     Enough to swallow forceless Sigismund,
     Yet scarce enough t' encounter Tamburlaine.
     He brings a world of people to the field,
     ]From Scythia to the oriental plage [16]
     Of India, where raging Lantchidol
     Beats on the regions with his boisterous blows,
     That never seaman yet discovered.
     All Asia is in arms with Tamburlaine,
     Even from the midst of fiery Cancer's tropic
     To Amazonia under Capricorn;
     And thence, as far as Archipelago,
     All Afric is in arms with Tamburlaine:
     Therefore, viceroy, [17] the Christians must have peace.

          Enter SIGISMUND, FREDERICK, BALDWIN, and their
          train, with drums and trumpets.

     SIGISMUND.  Orcanes, (as our legates promis'd thee,)
     We, with our peers, have cross'd Danubius' stream,
     To treat of friendly peace or deadly war.
     Take which thou wilt; for, as the Romans us'd,
     I here present thee with a naked sword:
     Wilt thou have war, then shake this blade at me;
     If peace, restore it to my hands again,
     And I will sheathe it, to confirm the same.

     ORCANES.  Stay, Sigismund:  forgett'st thou I am he
     That with the cannon shook Vienna-walls,
     And made it dance upon the continent,
     As when the massy substance of the earth
     Quiver[s] about the axle-tree of heaven?
     Forgett'st thou that I sent a shower of darts,
     Mingled with powder'd shot and feather'd steel,
     So thick upon the blink-ey'd burghers' heads,
     That thou thyself, then County Palatine,
     The King of Boheme, [18] and the Austric Duke,
     Sent heralds out, which basely on their knees,
     In all your names, desir'd a truce of me?
     Forgett'st thou that, to have me raise my siege,
     Waggons of gold were set before my tent,
     Stampt with the princely fowl that in her wings
     Carries the fearful thunderbolts of Jove?
     How canst thou think of this, and offer war?

     SIGISMUND.  Vienna was besieg'd, and I was there,
     Then County Palatine, but now a king,
     And what we did was in extremity
     But now, Orcanes, view my royal host,
     That hides these plains, and seems as vast and wide
     As doth the desert of Arabia
     To those that stand on Bagdet's [19] lofty tower,
     Or as the ocean to the traveller
     That rests upon the snowy Appenines;
     And tell me whether I should stoop so low,
     Or treat of peace with the Natolian king.

     GAZELLUS.  Kings of Natolia and of Hungary,
     We came from Turkey to confirm a league,
     And not to dare each other to the field.
     A friendly parle [20] might become you both.

     FREDERICK.  And we from Europe, to the same intent; [21]
     Which if your general refuse or scorn,
     Our tents are pitch'd, our men stand [22] in array,
     Ready to charge you ere you stir your feet.

     ORCANES.  So prest [23] are we:  but yet, if Sigismund
     Speak as a friend, and stand not upon terms,
     Here is his sword; let peace be ratified
     On these conditions specified before,
     Drawn with advice of our ambassadors.

     SIGISMUND.  Then here I sheathe it, and give thee my hand,
     Never to draw it out, or [24] manage arms
     Against thyself or thy confederates,
     But, whilst I live, will be at truce with thee.

     ORCANES.  But, Sigismund, confirm it with an oath,
     And swear in sight of heaven and by thy Christ.

     SIGISMUND.  By Him that made the world and sav'd my soul,
     The Son of God and issue of a maid,
     Sweet Jesus Christ, I solemnly protest
     And vow to keep this peace inviolable!

     ORCANES.  By sacred Mahomet, the friend of God,
     Whose holy Alcoran remains with us,
     Whose glorious body, when he left the world,
     Clos'd in a coffin mounted up the air,
     And hung on stately Mecca's temple-roof,
     I swear to keep this truce inviolable!
     Of whose conditions [25] and our solemn oaths,
     Sign'd with our hands, each shall retain a scroll,
     As memorable witness of our league.
     Now, Sigismund, if any Christian king
     Encroach upon the confines of thy realm,
     Send word, Orcanes of Natolia
     Confirm'd [26] this league beyond Danubius' stream,
     And they will, trembling, sound a quick retreat;
     So am I fear'd among all nations.

     SIGISMUND.  If any heathen potentate or king
     Invade Natolia, Sigismund will send
     A hundred thousand horse train'd to the war,
     And back'd by [27] stout lanciers of Germany,
     The strength and sinews of the imperial seat.

     ORCANES.  I thank thee, Sigismund; but, when I war,
     All Asia Minor, Africa, and Greece,
     Follow my standard and my thundering drums.
     Come, let us go and banquet in our tents:
     I will despatch chief of my army hence
     To fair Natolia and to Trebizon,
     To stay my coming 'gainst proud Tamburlaine:
     Friend Sigismund, and peers of Hungary,
     Come, banquet and carouse with us a while,
     And then depart we to our territories.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter CALLAPINE, and ALMEDA his keeper.

     CALLAPINE.  Sweet Almeda, pity the ruthful plight
     Of Callapine, the son of Bajazeth,
     Born to be monarch of the western world,
     Yet here detain'd by cruel Tamburlaine.

     ALMEDA.  My lord, I pity it, and with my heart
     Wish your release; but he whose wrath is death,
     My sovereign lord, renowmed [28] Tamburlaine,
     Forbids you further liberty than this.

     CALLAPINE.  Ah, were I now but half so eloquent
     To paint in words what I'll perform in deeds,
     I know thou wouldst depart from hence with me!

     ALMEDA.  Not for all Afric:  therefore move me not.

     CALLAPINE.  Yet hear me speak, my gentle Almeda.

     ALMEDA.  No speech to that end, by your favour, sir.

     CALLAPINE.  By Cairo [29] runs--

     ALMEDA.  No talk of running, I tell you, sir.

     CALLAPINE.  A little further, gentle Almeda.

     ALMEDA.  Well, sir, what of this?

     CALLAPINE.  By Cairo runs to Alexandria-bay
     Darotes' stream, [30] wherein at [31] anchor lies
     A Turkish galley of my royal fleet,
     Waiting my coming to the river-side,
     Hoping by some means I shall be releas'd;
     Which, when I come aboard, will hoist up sail,
     And soon put forth into the Terrene [32] sea,
     Where, [33] 'twixt the isles of Cyprus and of Crete,
     We quickly may in Turkish seas arrive.
     Then shalt thou see a hundred kings and more,
     Upon their knees, all bid me welcome home.
     Amongst so many crowns of burnish'd gold,
     Choose which thou wilt, all are at thy command:
     A thousand galleys, mann'd with Christian slaves,
     I freely give thee, which shall cut the Straits,
     And bring armadoes, from [34] the coasts of Spain,
     Fraughted with gold of rich America:
     The Grecian virgins shall attend on thee,
     Skilful in music and in amorous lays,
     As fair as was Pygmalion's ivory girl
     Or lovely Io metamorphosed:
     With naked negroes shall thy coach be drawn,
     And, as thou rid'st in triumph through the streets,
     The pavement underneath thy chariot-wheels
     With Turkey-carpets shall be covered,
     And cloth of arras hung about the walls,
     Fit objects for thy princely eye to pierce:
     A hundred bassoes, cloth'd in crimson silk,
     Shall ride before thee on Barbarian steeds;
     And, when thou goest, a golden canopy
     Enchas'd with precious stones, which shine as bright
     As that fair veil that covers all the world,
     When Phoebus, leaping from his hemisphere,
     Descendeth downward to th' Antipodes:--
     And more than this, for all I cannot tell.

     ALMEDA.  How far hence lies the galley, say you?

     CALLAPINE.  Sweet Almeda, scarce half a league from hence.

     ALMEDA.  But need [35] we not be spied going aboard?

     CALLAPINE.  Betwixt the hollow hanging of a hill,
     And crooked bending of a craggy rock,
     The sails wrapt up, the mast and tacklings down,
     She lies so close that none can find her out.

     ALMEDA.  I like that well:  but, tell me, my lord,
     if I should let you go, would you be as good as
     your word? shall I be made a king for my labour?

     CALLAPINE.  As I am Callapine the emperor,
     And by the hand of Mahomet I swear,
     Thou shalt be crown'd a king, and be my mate!

     ALMEDA.  Then here I swear, as I am Almeda,
     Your keeper under Tamburlaine the Great,
     (For that's the style and title I have yet,)
     Although he sent a thousand armed men
     To intercept this haughty enterprize,
     Yet would I venture to conduct your grace,
     And die before I brought you back again!

     CALLAPINE.  Thanks, gentle Almeda:  then let us haste,
     Lest time be past, and lingering let [36] us both.

     ALMEDA.  When you will, my lord:  I am ready.

     CALLAPINE.  Even straight:--and farewell, cursed Tamburlaine!
     Now go I to revenge my father's death.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, ZENOCRATE, and their three sons,
          CALYPHAS, AMYRAS, and CELEBINUS, with drums and trumpets.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now, bright Zenocrate, the world's fair eye,
     Whose beams illuminate the lamps of heaven,
     Whose cheerful looks do clear the cloudy air,
     And clothe it in a crystal livery,
     Now rest thee here on fair Larissa-plains,
     Where Egypt and the Turkish empire part
     Between thy sons, that shall be emperors,
     And every one commander of a world.

     ZENOCRATE.  Sweet Tamburlaine, when wilt thou leave these arms,
     And save thy sacred person free from scathe,
     And dangerous chances of the wrathful war?

     TAMBURLAINE.  When heaven shall cease to move on both the poles,
     And when the ground, whereon my soldiers march,
     Shall rise aloft and touch the horned moon;
     And not before, my sweet Zenocrate.
     Sit up, and rest thee like a lovely queen.
     So; now she sits in pomp and majesty,
     When these, my sons, more precious in mine eyes
     Than all the wealthy kingdoms I subdu'd,
     Plac'd by her side, look on their mother's face.
     But yet methinks their looks are amorous,
     Not martial as the sons of Tamburlaine:
     Water and air, being symboliz'd in one,
     Argue their want of courage and of wit;
     Their hair as white as milk, and soft as down,
     (Which should be like the quills of porcupines,
     As black as jet, and hard as iron or steel,)
     Bewrays they are too dainty for the wars;
     Their fingers made to quaver on a lute,
     Their arms to hang about a lady's neck,
     Their legs to dance and caper in the air,
     Would make me think them bastards, not my sons,
     But that I know they issu'd from thy womb,
     That never look'd on man but Tamburlaine.

     ZENOCRATE.  My gracious lord, they have their mother's looks,
     But, when they list, their conquering father's heart.
     This lovely boy, the youngest of the three,
     Not long ago bestrid a Scythian steed,
     Trotting the ring, and tilting at a glove,
     Which when he tainted [37] with his slender rod,
     He rein'd him straight, and made him so curvet
     As I cried out for fear he should have faln.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Well done, my boy! thou shalt have shield and lance,
     Armour of proof, horse, helm, and curtle-axe,
     And I will teach thee how to charge thy foe,
     And harmless run among the deadly pikes.
     If thou wilt love the wars and follow me,
     Thou shalt be made a king and reign with me,
     Keeping in iron cages emperors.
     If thou exceed thy elder brothers' worth,
     And shine in complete virtue more than they,
     Thou shalt be king before them, and thy seed
     Shall issue crowned from their mother's womb.

     CELEBINUS.  Yes, father; you shall see me, if I live,
     Have under me as many kings as you,
     And march with such a multitude of men
     As all the world shall [38] tremble at their view.

     TAMBURLAINE.  These words assure me, boy, thou art my son.
     When I am old and cannot manage arms,
     Be thou the scourge and terror of the world.

     AMYRAS.  Why may not I, my lord, as well as he,
     Be term'd the scourge and terror of [39] the world?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Be all a scourge and terror to [40] the world,
     Or else you are not sons of Tamburlaine.

     CALYPHAS.  But, while my brothers follow arms, my lord,
     Let me accompany my gracious mother:
     They are enough to conquer all the world,
     And you have won enough for me to keep.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Bastardly boy, sprung [41] from some coward's loins,
     And not the issue of great Tamburlaine!
     Of all the provinces I have subdu'd
     Thou shalt not have a foot, unless thou bear
     A mind courageous and invincible;
     For he shall wear the crown of Persia
     Whose head hath deepest scars, whose breast most wounds,
     Which, being wroth, sends lightning from his eyes,
     And in the furrows of his frowning brows
     Harbours revenge, war, death, and cruelty;
     For in a field, whose superficies [42]
     Is cover'd with a liquid purple veil,
     And sprinkled with the brains of slaughter'd men,
     My royal chair of state shall be advanc'd;
     And he that means to place himself therein,
     Must armed wade up to the chin in blood.

     ZENOCRATE.  My lord, such speeches to our princely sons
     Dismay their minds before they come to prove
     The wounding troubles angry war affords.

     CELEBINUS.  No, madam, these are speeches fit for us;
     For, if his chair were in a sea of blood,
     I would prepare a ship and sail to it,
     Ere I would lose the title of a king.

     AMYRAS.  And I would strive to swim through [43] pools of blood,
     Or make a bridge of murder'd carcasses, [44]
     Whose arches should be fram'd with bones of Turks,
     Ere I would lose the title of a king.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, lovely boys, ye shall be emperors both,
     Stretching your conquering arms from east to west:--
     And, sirrah, if you mean to wear a crown,
     When we [45] shall meet the Turkish deputy
     And all his viceroys, snatch it from his head,
     And cleave his pericranion with thy sword.

     CALYPHAS.  If any man will hold him, I will strike,
     And cleave him to the channel [46] with my sword.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Hold him, and cleave him too, or I'll cleave thee;
     For we will march against them presently.
     Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane
     Promis'd to meet me on Larissa-plains,
     With hosts a-piece against this Turkish crew;
     For I have sworn by sacred Mahomet
     To make it parcel of my empery.
     The trumpets sound; Zenocrate, they come.
          Enter THERIDAMAS, and his train, with drums and trumpets.
     Welcome, Theridamas, king of Argier.

     THERIDAMAS.  My lord, the great and mighty Tamburlaine,
     Arch-monarch of the world, I offer here
     My crown, myself, and all the power I have,
     In all affection at thy kingly feet.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thanks, good Theridamas.

     THERIDAMAS.  Under my colours march ten thousand Greeks,
     And of Argier and Afric's frontier towns
     Twice twenty thousand valiant men-at-arms;
     All which have sworn to sack Natolia.
     Five hundred brigandines are under sail,
     Meet for your service on the sea, my lord,
     That, launching from Argier to Tripoly,
     Will quickly ride before Natolia,
     And batter down the castles on the shore.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well said, Argier! receive thy crown again.
          Enter USUMCASANE and TECHELLES.
     Kings of Morocco [47] and of Fez, welcome.

     USUMCASANE.  Magnificent and peerless Tamburlaine,
     I and my neighbour king of Fez have brought,
     To aid thee in this Turkish expedition,
     A hundred thousand expert soldiers;
     ]From Azamor to Tunis near the sea
     Is Barbary unpeopled for thy sake,
     And all the men in armour under me,
     Which with my crown I gladly offer thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thanks, king of Morocco:  take your crown again.

     TECHELLES.  And, mighty Tamburlaine, our earthly god,
     Whose looks make this inferior world to quake,
     I here present thee with the crown of Fez,
     And with an host of Moors train'd to the war, [48]
     Whose coal-black faces make their foes retire,
     And quake for fear, as if infernal [49] Jove,
     Meaning to aid thee [50] in these [51] Turkish arms,
     Should pierce the black circumference of hell,
     With ugly Furies bearing fiery flags,
     And millions of his strong [52] tormenting spirits:
     ]From strong Tesella unto Biledull
     All Barbary is unpeopled for thy sake.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thanks, king of Fez:  take here thy crown again.
     Your presence, loving friends and fellow-kings,
     Makes me to surfeit in conceiving joy:
     If all the crystal gates of Jove's high court
     Were open'd wide, and I might enter in
     To see the state and majesty of heaven,
     It could not more delight me than your sight.
     Now will we banquet on these plains a while,
     And after march to Turkey with our camp,
     In number more than are the drops that fall
     When Boreas rents a thousand swelling clouds;
     And proud Orcanes of Natolia
     With all his viceroys shall be so afraid,
     That, though the stones, as at Deucalion's flood,
     Were turn'd to men, he should be overcome.
     Such lavish will I make of Turkish blood,
     That Jove shall send his winged messenger
     To bid me sheathe my sword and leave the field;
     The sun, unable to sustain the sight,
     Shall hide his head in Thetis' watery lap,
     And leave his steeds to fair Bootes' [53] charge;
     For half the world shall perish in this fight.
     But now, my friends, let me examine ye;
     How have ye spent your absent time from me?

     USUMCASANE.  My lord, our men of Barbary have march'd
     Four hundred miles with armour on their backs,
     And lain in leaguer [54] fifteen months and more;
     For, since we left you at the Soldan's court,
     We have subdu'd the southern Guallatia,
     And all the land unto the coast of Spain;
     We kept the narrow Strait of Jubalter, [55]
     And made Canaria call us kings and lords:
     Yet never did they recreate themselves,
     Or cease one day from war and hot alarms;
     And therefore let them rest a while, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  They shall, Casane, and 'tis time, i'faith.

     TECHELLES.  And I have march'd along the river Nile
     To Machda, where the mighty Christian priest,
     Call'd John the Great, [56] sits in a milk-white robe,
     Whose triple mitre I did take by force,
     And made him swear obedience to my crown.
     ]From thence unto Cazates did I march,
     Where Amazonians met me in the field,
     With whom, being women, I vouchsaf'd a league,
     And with my power did march to Zanzibar,
     The western part of Afric, where I view'd
     The Ethiopian sea, rivers and lakes,
     But neither man nor child in all the land:
     Therefore I took my course to Manico,
     Where, [57] unresisted, I remov'd my camp;
     And, by the coast of Byather, [58] at last
     I came to Cubar, where the negroes dwell,
     And, conquering that, made haste to Nubia.
     There, having sack'd Borno, the kingly seat,
     I took the king and led him bound in chains
     Unto Damascus, [59] where I stay'd before.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well done, Techelles!--What saith Theridamas?

     THERIDAMAS.  I left the confines and the bounds of Afric,
     And made [60] a voyage into Europe,
     Where, by the river Tyras, I subdu'd
     Stoka, Podolia, and Codemia;
     Then cross'd the sea and came to Oblia,
     And Nigra Silva, where the devils dance,
     Which, in despite of them, I set on fire.
     ]From thence I cross'd the gulf call'd by the name
     Mare Majore of the inhabitants.
     Yet shall my soldiers make no period
     Until Natolia kneel before your feet.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Then will we triumph, banquet and carouse;
     Cooks shall have pensions to provide us cates,
     And glut us with the dainties of the world;
     Lachryma Christi and Calabrian wines
     Shall common soldiers drink in quaffing bowls,
     Ay, liquid gold, when we have conquer'd him, [61]
     Mingled with coral and with orient [62] pearl.
     Come, let us banquet and carouse the whiles.
          [Exeunt.]




ACT II.




SCENE I.

          Enter SIGISMUND, FREDERICK, and BALDWIN, with their train.

     SIGISMUND.  Now say, my lords of Buda and Bohemia,
     What motion is it that inflames your thoughts,
     And stirs your valours to such sudden arms?

     FREDERICK.  Your majesty remembers, I am sure,
     What cruel slaughter of our Christian bloods
     These heathenish Turks and pagans lately made
     Betwixt the city Zula and Danubius;
     How through the midst of Varna and Bulgaria,
     And almost to the very walls of Rome,
     They have, not long since, massacred our camp.
     It resteth now, then, that your majesty
     Take all advantages of time and power,
     And work revenge upon these infidels.
     Your highness knows, for Tamburlaine's repair,
     That strikes a terror to all Turkish hearts,
     Natolia hath dismiss'd the greatest part
     Of all his army, pitch'd against our power
     Betwixt Cutheia and Orminius' mount,
     And sent them marching up to Belgasar,
     Acantha, Antioch, and Caesarea,
     To aid the kings of Soria [63] and Jerusalem.
     Now, then, my lord, advantage take thereof, [64]
     And issue suddenly upon the rest;
     That, in the fortune of their overthrow,
     We may discourage all the pagan troop
     That dare attempt to war with Christians.

     SIGISMUND.  But calls not, then, your grace to memory
     The league we lately made with King Orcanes,
     Confirm'd by oath and articles of peace,
     And calling Christ for record of our truths?
     This should be treachery and violence
     Against the grace of our profession.

     BALDWIN.  No whit, my lord; for with such infidels,
     In whom no faith nor true religion rests,
     We are not bound to those accomplishments
     The holy laws of Christendom enjoin;
     But, as the faith which they profanely plight
     Is not by necessary policy
     To be esteem'd assurance for ourselves,
     So that we vow [65] to them should not infringe
     Our liberty of arms and victory.

     SIGISMUND.  Though I confess the oaths they undertake
     Breed little strength to our security,
     Yet those infirmities that thus defame
     Their faiths, [66] their honours, and religion, [67]
     Should not give us presumption to the like.
     Our faiths are sound, and must be consummate, [68]
     Religious, righteous, and inviolate.

     FREDERICK.  Assure your grace, 'tis superstition
     To stand so strictly on dispensive faith;
     And, should we lose the opportunity
     That God hath given to venge our Christians' death,
     And scourge their foul blasphemous paganism,
     As fell to Saul, to Balaam, and the rest,
     That would not kill and curse at God's command,
     So surely will the vengeance of the Highest,
     And jealous anger of his fearful arm,
     Be pour'd with rigour on our sinful heads,
     If we neglect this [69] offer'd victory.

     SIGISMUND.  Then arm, my lords, and issue suddenly,
     Giving commandment to our general host,
     With expedition to assail the pagan,
     And take the victory our God hath given.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter ORCANES, GAZELLUS, and URIBASSA, with their train.

     ORCANES.  Gazellus, Uribassa, and the rest,
     Now will we march from proud Orminius' mount
     To fair Natolia, where our neighbour kings
     Expect our power and our royal presence,
     T' encounter with the cruel Tamburlaine,
     That nigh Larissa sways a mighty host,
     And with the thunder of his martial [70] tools
     Makes earthquakes in the hearts of men and heaven.

     GAZELLUS.  And now come we to make his sinews shake
     With greater power than erst his pride hath felt.
     An hundred kings, by scores, will bid him arms,
     And hundred thousands subjects to each score:
     Which, if a shower of wounding thunderbolts
     Should break out of the bowels of the clouds,
     And fall as thick as hail upon our heads,
     In partial aid of that proud Scythian,
     Yet should our courages and steeled crests,
     And numbers, more than infinite, of men,
     Be able to withstand and conquer him.

     URIBASSA.  Methinks I see how glad the Christian king
     Is made for joy of our [71] admitted truce,
     That could not but before be terrified
     With [72] unacquainted power of our host.

          Enter a Messenger.

     MESSENGER.  Arm, dread sovereign, and my noble lords!
     The treacherous army of the Christians,
     Taking advantage of your slender power,
     Comes marching on us, and determines straight
     To bid us battle for our dearest lives.

     ORCANES.  Traitors, villains, damned Christians!
     Have I not here the articles of peace
     And solemn covenants we have both confirm'd,
     He by his Christ, and I by Mahomet?

     GAZELLUS.  Hell and confusion light upon their heads,
     That with such treason seek our overthrow,
     And care so little for their prophet Christ!

     ORCANES.  Can there be such deceit in Christians,
     Or treason in the fleshly heart of man,
     Whose shape is figure of the highest God?
     Then, if there be a Christ, as Christians say,
     But in their deeds deny him for their Christ,
     If he be son to everliving Jove,
     And hath the power of his outstretched arm,
     If he be jealous of his name and honour
     As is our holy prophet Mahomet,
     Take here these papers as our sacrifice
     And witness of thy servant's [73] perjury!
          [He tears to pieces the articles of peace.]
     Open, thou shining veil of Cynthia,
     And make a passage from th' empyreal heaven,
     That he that sits on high and never sleeps,
     Nor in one place is circumscriptible,
     But every where fills every continent
     With strange infusion of his sacred vigour,
     May, in his endless power and purity,
     Behold and venge this traitor's perjury!
     Thou, Christ, that art esteem'd omnipotent,
     If thou wilt prove thyself a perfect God,
     Worthy the worship of all faithful hearts,
     Be now reveng'd upon this traitor's soul,
     And make the power I have left behind
     (Too little to defend our guiltless lives)
     Sufficient to discomfit [74] and confound
     The trustless force of those false Christians!--
     To arms, my lords! [75] on Christ still let us cry:
     If there be Christ, we shall have victory.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Alarms of battle within.  Enter SIGISMUND wounded.

     SIGISMUND.  Discomfited is all the Christian [76] host,
     And God hath thunder'd vengeance from on high,
     For my accurs'd and hateful perjury.
     O just and dreadful punisher of sin,
     Let the dishonour of the pains I feel
     In this my mortal well-deserved wound
     End all my penance in my sudden death!
     And let this death, wherein to sin I die,
     Conceive a second life in endless mercy!
          [Dies.]

          Enter ORCANES, GAZELLUS, URIBASSA, with others.

     ORCANES.  Now lie the Christians bathing in their bloods,
     And Christ or Mahomet hath been my friend.

     GAZELLUS.  See, here the perjur'd traitor Hungary,
     Bloody and breathless for his villany!

     ORCANES.  Now shall his barbarous body be a prey
     To beasts and fowls, and all the winds shall breathe,
     Through shady leaves of every senseless tree,
     Murmurs and hisses for his heinous sin.
     Now scalds his soul in the Tartarian streams,
     And feeds upon the baneful tree of hell,
     That Zoacum, [77] that fruit of bitterness,
     That in the midst of fire is ingraff'd,
     Yet flourisheth, as Flora in her pride,
     With apples like the heads of damned fiends.
     The devils there, in chains of quenchless flame,
     Shall lead his soul, through Orcus' burning gulf,
     ]From pain to pain, whose change shall never end.
     What say'st thou yet, Gazellus, to his foil,
     Which we referr'd to justice of his Christ
     And to his power, which here appears as full
     As rays of Cynthia to the clearest sight?

     GAZELLUS.  'Tis but the fortune of the wars, my lord,
     Whose power is often prov'd a miracle.

     ORCANES.  Yet in my thoughts shall Christ be honoured,
     Not doing Mahomet an [78] injury,
     Whose power had share in this our victory;
     And, since this miscreant hath disgrac'd his faith,
     And died a traitor both to heaven and earth,
     We will both watch and ward shall keep his trunk [79]
     Amidst these plains for fowls to prey upon.
     Go, Uribassa, give [80] it straight in charge.

     URIBASSA.  I will, my lord.
          [Exit.]

     ORCANES.  And now, Gazellus, let us haste and meet
     Our army, and our brother[s] of Jerusalem,
     Of Soria, [81] Trebizon, and Amasia,
     And happily, with full Natolian bowls
     Of Greekish wine, now let us celebrate
     Our happy conquest and his angry fate.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE IV.

          The arras is drawn, and ZENOCRATE is discovered lying
          in her bed of state; TAMBURLAINE sitting by her; three
          PHYSICIANS about her bed, tempering potions; her three
          sons, CALYPHAS, AMYRAS, and CELEBINUS; THERIDAMAS,
          TECHELLES, and USUMCASANE.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Black is the beauty of the brightest day;
     The golden ball of heaven's eternal fire,
     That danc'd with glory on the silver waves,
     Now wants the fuel that inflam'd his beams;
     And all with faintness, and for foul disgrace,
     He binds his temples with a frowning cloud,
     Ready to darken earth with endless night.
     Zenocrate, that gave him light and life,
     Whose eyes shot fire from their [82] ivory brows, [83]
     And temper'd every soul with lively heat,
     Now by the malice of the angry skies,
     Whose jealousy admits no second mate,
     Draws in the comfort of her latest breath,
     All dazzled with the hellish mists of death.
     Now walk the angels on the walls of heaven,
     As sentinels to warn th' immortal souls
     To entertain divine Zenocrate:
     Apollo, Cynthia, and the ceaseless lamps
     That gently look'd upon this [84] loathsome earth,
     Shine downwards now no more, but deck the heavens
     To entertain divine Zenocrate:
     The crystal springs, whose taste illuminates
     Refined eyes with an eternal sight,
     Like tried silver run through Paradise
     To entertain divine Zenocrate:
     The cherubins and holy seraphins,
     That sing and play before the King of Kings,
     Use all their voices and their instruments
     To entertain divine Zenocrate;
     And, in this sweet and curious harmony,
     The god that tunes this music to our souls
     Holds out his hand in highest majesty
     To entertain divine Zenocrate.
     Then let some holy trance convey my thoughts
     Up to the palace of th' empyreal heaven,
     That this my life may be as short to me
     As are the days of sweet Zenocrate.--
     Physicians, will no [85] physic do her good?

     FIRST PHYSICIAN.  My lord, your majesty shall soon perceive,
     An if she pass this fit, the worst is past.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Tell me, how fares my fair Zenocrate?

     ZENOCRATE.  I fare, my lord, as other empresses,
     That, when this frail and [86] transitory flesh
     Hath suck'd the measure of that vital air
     That feeds the body with his dated health,
     Wane with enforc'd and necessary change.

     TAMBURLAINE.  May never such a change transform my love,
     In whose sweet being I repose my life!
     Whose heavenly presence, beautified with health,
     Gives light to Phoebus and the fixed stars;
     Whose absence makes [87] the sun and moon as dark
     As when, oppos'd in one diameter,
     Their spheres are mounted on the serpent's head,
     Or else descended to his winding train.
     Live still, my love, and so conserve my life,
     Or, dying, be the author [88] of my death.

     ZENOCRATE.  Live still, my lord; O, let my sovereign live!
     And sooner let the fiery element
     Dissolve, and make your kingdom in the sky,
     Than this base earth should shroud your majesty;
     For, should I but suspect your death by mine,
     The comfort of my future happiness,
     And hope to meet your highness in the heavens,
     Turn'd to despair, would break my wretched breast,
     And fury would confound my present rest.
     But let me die, my love; yes, [89] let me die;
     With love and patience let your true love die:
     Your grief and fury hurts my second life.
     Yet let me kiss my lord before I die,
     And let me die with kissing of my lord.
     But, since my life is lengthen'd yet a while,
     Let me take leave of these my loving sons,
     And of my lords, whose true nobility
     Have merited my latest memory.
     Sweet sons, farewell! in death resemble me,
     And in your lives your father's excellence. [90]
     Some music, and my fit will cease, my lord.
          [They call for music.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Proud fury, and intolerable fit,
     That dares torment the body of my love,
     And scourge the scourge of the immortal God!
     Now are those spheres, where Cupid us'd to sit,
     Wounding the world with wonder and with love,
     Sadly supplied with pale and ghastly death,
     Whose darts do pierce the centre of my soul.
     Her sacred beauty hath enchanted heaven;
     And, had she liv'd before the siege of Troy,
     Helen, whose beauty summon'd Greece to arms,
     And drew a thousand ships to Tenedos,
     Had not been nam'd in Homer's Iliads,--
     Her name had been in every line he wrote;
     Or, had those wanton poets, for whose birth
     Old Rome was proud, but gaz'd a while on her,
     Nor Lesbia nor Corinna had been nam'd,--
     Zenocrate had been the argument
     Of every epigram or elegy.
          [The music sounds--ZENOCRATE dies.]
     What, is she dead?  Techelles, draw thy sword,
     And wound the earth, that it may cleave in twain,
     And we descend into th' infernal vaults,
     To hale the Fatal Sisters by the hair,
     And throw them in the triple moat of hell,
     For taking hence my fair Zenocrate.
     Casane and Theridamas, to arms!
     Raise cavalieros [91] higher than the clouds,
     And with the cannon break the frame of heaven;
     Batter the shining palace of the sun,
     And shiver all the starry firmament,
     For amorous Jove hath snatch'd my love from hence,
     Meaning to make her stately queen of heaven.
     What god soever holds thee in his arms,
     Giving thee nectar and ambrosia,
     Behold me here, divine Zenocrate,
     Raving, impatient, desperate, and mad,
     Breaking my steeled lance, with which I burst
     The rusty beams of Janus' temple-doors,
     Letting out Death and tyrannizing War,
     To march with me under this bloody flag!
     And, if thou pitiest Tamburlaine the Great,
     Come down from heaven, and live with me again!

     THERIDAMAS.  Ah, good my lord, be patient! she is dead,
     And all this raging cannot make her live.
     If words might serve, our voice hath rent the air;
     If tears, our eyes have water'd all the earth;
     If grief, our murder'd hearts have strain'd forth blood:
     Nothing prevails, [92] for she is dead, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  FOR SHE IS DEAD! thy words do pierce my soul:
     Ah, sweet Theridamas, say so no more!
     Though she be dead, yet let me think she lives,
     And feed my mind that dies for want of her.
     Where'er her soul be, thou [To the body] shalt stay with me,
     Embalm'd with cassia, ambergris, and myrrh,
     Not lapt in lead, but in a sheet of gold,
     And, till I die, thou shalt not be interr'd.
     Then in as rich a tomb as Mausolus' [93]
     We both will rest, and have one [94] epitaph
     Writ in as many several languages
     As I have conquer'd kingdoms with my sword.
     This cursed town will I consume with fire,
     Because this place bereft me of my love;
     The houses, burnt, will look as if they mourn'd;
     And here will I set up her stature, [95]
     And march about it with my mourning camp,
     Drooping and pining for Zenocrate.
          [The arras is drawn.]




ACT III.




SCENE I.

          Enter the KINGS OF TREBIZON and SORIA, [96] one bringing a
          sword and the other a sceptre; next, ORCANES king of
          Natolia, and the KING OF JERUSALEM with the imperial crown,
          after, CALLAPINE; and, after him, other LORDS and ALMEDA.
          ORCANES and the KING OF JERUSALEM crown CALLAPINE, and the
          others give him the sceptre.

     ORCANES.  Callapinus Cyricelibes, otherwise Cybelius, son and
     successive heir to the late mighty emperor Bajazeth, by the aid
     of God and his friend Mahomet, Emperor of Natolia, Jerusalem,
     Trebizon, Soria, Amasia, Thracia, Ilyria, Carmania, and all the
     hundred and thirty kingdoms late contributory to his mighty
     father,--long live Callapinus, Emperor of Turkey!

     CALLAPINE.  Thrice-worthy kings, of Natolia and the rest,
     I will requite your royal gratitudes
     With all the benefits my empire yields;
     And, were the sinews of th' imperial seat
     So knit and strengthen'd as when Bajazeth,
     My royal lord and father, fill'd the throne,
     Whose cursed fate [97] hath so dismember'd it,
     Then should you see this thief of Scythia,
     This proud usurping king of Persia,
     Do us such honour and supremacy,
     Bearing the vengeance of our father's wrongs,
     As all the world should blot his [98] dignities
     Out of the book of base-born infamies.
     And now I doubt not but your royal cares
     Have so provided for this cursed foe,
     That, since the heir of mighty Bajazeth
     (An emperor so honour'd for his virtues)
     Revives the spirits of all [99] true Turkish hearts,
     In grievous memory of his father's shame,
     We shall not need to nourish any doubt,
     But that proud Fortune, who hath follow'd long
     The martial sword of mighty Tamburlaine,
     Will now retain her old inconstancy,
     And raise our honours [100] to as high a pitch,
     In this our strong and fortunate encounter;
     For so hath heaven provided my escape
     ]From all the cruelty my soul sustain'd,
     By this my friendly keeper's happy means,
     That Jove, surcharg'd with pity of our wrongs,
     Will pour it down in showers on our heads,
     Scourging the pride of cursed Tamburlaine.

     ORCANES.  I have a hundred thousand men in arms;
     Some that, in conquest [101] of the perjur'd Christian,
     Being a handful to a mighty host,
     Think them in number yet sufficient
     To drink the river Nile or Euphrates,
     And for their power enow to win the world.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  And I as many from Jerusalem,
     Judaea, [102] Gaza, and Sclavonia's [103] bounds,
     That on mount Sinai, with their ensigns spread,
     Look like the parti-colour'd clouds of heaven
     That shew fair weather to the neighbour morn.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  And I as many bring from Trebizon,
     Chio, Famastro, and Amasia,
     All bordering on the Mare-Major-sea,
     Riso, Sancina, and the bordering towns
     That touch the end of famous Euphrates,
     Whose courages are kindled with the flames
     The cursed Scythian sets on all their towns,
     And vow to burn the villain's cruel heart.

     KING OF SORIA.  From Soria [104] with seventy thousand strong,
     Ta'en from Aleppo, Soldino, Tripoly,
     And so unto my city of Damascus, [105]
     I march to meet and aid my neighbour kings;
     All which will join against this Tamburlaine,
     And bring him captive to your highness' feet.

     ORCANES.  Our battle, then, in martial manner pitch'd,
     According to our ancient use, shall bear
     The figure of the semicircled moon,
     Whose horns shell sprinkle through the tainted air
     The poison'd brains of this proud Scythian.

     CALLAPINE.  Well, then, my noble lords, for this my friend
     That freed me from the bondage of my foe,
     I think it requisite and honourable
     To keep my promise and to make him king,
     That is a gentleman, I know, at least.

     ALMEDA.  That's no matter, [106] sir, for being a king;
     or Tamburlaine came up of nothing.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Your majesty may choose some 'pointed time,
     Performing all your promise to the full;
     'Tis naught for your majesty to give a kingdom.

     CALLAPINE.  Then will I shortly keep my promise, Almeda.

     ALMEDA.  Why, I thank your majesty.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE and his three sons, CALYPHAS, AMYRAS, and
          CELEBINUS; USUMCASANE; four ATTENDANTS bearing the hearse of
          ZENOCRATE, and the drums sounding a doleful march; the town
          burning.

     TAMBURLAINE.  So burn the turrets of this cursed town,
     Flame to the highest region of the air,
     And kindle heaps of exhalations,
     That, being fiery meteors, may presage
     Death and destruction to the inhabitants!
     Over my zenith hang a blazing star,
     That may endure till heaven be dissolv'd,
     Fed with the fresh supply of earthly dregs,
     Threatening a dearth [107] and famine to this land!
     Flying dragons, lightning, fearful thunder-claps,
     Singe these fair plains, and make them seem as black
     As is the island where the Furies mask,
     Compass'd with Lethe, Styx, and Phlegethon,
     Because my dear Zenocrate is dead!

     CALYPHAS.  This pillar, plac'd in memory of her,
     Where in Arabian, Hebrew, Greek, is writ,
     THIS TOWN, BEING BURNT BY TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT,
     FORBIDS THE WORLD TO BUILD IT UP AGAIN.

     AMYRAS.  And here this mournful streamer shall be plac'd,
     Wrought with the Persian and th' [108] Egyptian arms,
     To signify she was a princess born,
     And wife unto the monarch of the East.

     CELEBINUS.  And here this table as a register
     Of all her virtues and perfections.

     TAMBURLAINE.  And here the picture of Zenocrate,
     To shew her beauty which the world admir'd;
     Sweet picture of divine Zenocrate,
     That, hanging here, will draw the gods from heaven,
     And cause the stars fix'd in the southern arc,
     (Whose lovely faces never any view'd
     That have not pass'd the centre's latitude,)
     As pilgrims travel to our hemisphere,
     Only to gaze upon Zenocrate.
     Thou shalt not beautify Larissa-plains,
     But keep within the circle of mine arms:
     At every town and castle I besiege,
     Thou shalt be set upon my royal tent;
     And, when I meet an army in the field,
     Those [109] looks will shed such influence in my camp,
     As if Bellona, goddess of the war,
     Threw naked swords and sulphur-balls of fire
     Upon the heads of all our enemies.--
     And now, my lords, advance your spears again;
     Sorrow no more, my sweet Casane, now:
     Boys, leave to mourn; this town shall ever mourn,
     Being burnt to cinders for your mother's death.

     CALYPHAS.  If I had wept a sea of tears for her,
     would not ease the sorrows [110] I sustain.

     AMYRAS.  As is that town, so is my heart consum'd
     With grief and sorrow for my mother's death.

     CELEBINUS.  My mother's death hath mortified my mind,
     And sorrow stops the passage of my speech.

     TAMBURLAINE.  But now, my boys, leave off, and list to me,
     That mean to teach you rudiments of war.
     I'll have you learn to sleep upon the ground,
     March in your armour thorough watery fens,
     Sustain the scorching heat and freezing cold,
     Hunger and thirst, [111] right adjuncts of the war;
     And, after this, to scale a castle-wall,
     Besiege a fort, to undermine a town,
     And make whole cities caper in the air:
     Then next, the way to fortify your men;
     In champion [112] grounds what figure serves you best,
     For which [113] the quinque-angle form is meet,
     Because the corners there may fall more flat
     Whereas [114] the fort may fittest be assail'd,
     And sharpest where th' assault is desperate:
     The ditches must be deep; the [115] counterscarps
     Narrow and steep; the walls made high and broad;
     The bulwarks and the rampires large and strong,
     With cavalieros [116] and thick counterforts,
     And room within to lodge six thousand men;
     It must have privy ditches, countermines,
     And secret issuings to defend the ditch;
     It must have high argins [117] and cover'd ways
     To keep the bulwark-fronts from battery,
     And parapets to hide the musketeers,
     Casemates to place the great [118] artillery,
     And store of ordnance, that from every flank
     May scour the outward curtains of the fort,
     Dismount the cannon of the adverse part,
     Murder the foe, and save the [119] walls from breach.
     When this is learn'd for service on the land,
     By plain and easy demonstration
     I'll teach you how to make the water mount,
     That you may dry-foot march through lakes and pools,
     Deep rivers, havens, creeks, and little seas,
     And make a fortress in the raging waves,
     Fenc'd with the concave of a monstrous rock,
     Invincible by nature [120] of the place.
     When this is done, then are ye soldiers,
     And worthy sons of Tamburlaine the Great.

     CALYPHAS.  My lord, but this is dangerous to be done;
     We may be slain or wounded ere we learn.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villain, art thou the son of Tamburlaine,
     And fear'st to die, or with a [121] curtle-axe
     To hew thy flesh, and make a gaping wound?
     Hast thou beheld a peal of ordnance strike
     A ring of pikes, mingled with shot and horse, [122]
     Whose shatter'd limbs, being toss'd as high as heaven,
     Hang in the air as thick as sunny motes,
     And canst thou, coward, stand in fear of death?
     Hast thou not seen my horsemen charge the foe,
     Shot through the arms, cut overthwart the hands,
     Dying their lances with their streaming blood,
     And yet at night carouse within my tent,
     Filling their empty veins with airy wine,
     That, being concocted, turns to crimson blood,
     And wilt thou shun the field for fear of wounds?
     View me, thy father, that hath conquer'd kings,
     And, with his [123] host, march'd [124] round about the earth,
     Quite void of scars and clear from any wound,
     That by the wars lost not a drop [125] of blood,
     And see him lance [126] his flesh to teach you all.
          [He cuts his arm.]
     A wound is nothing, be it ne'er so deep;
     Blood is the god of war's rich livery.
     Now look I like a soldier, and this wound
     As great a grace and majesty to me,
     As if a chair of gold enamelled,
     Enchas'd with diamonds, sapphires, rubies,
     And fairest pearl of wealthy India,
     Were mounted here under a canopy,
     And I sat down, cloth'd with a massy robe
     That late adorn'd the Afric potentate,
     Whom I brought bound unto Damascus' walls.
     Come, boys, and with your fingers search my wound,
     And in my blood wash all your hands at once,
     While I sit smiling to behold the sight.
     Now, my boys, what think ye of a wound?

     CALYPHAS.  I know not [127] what I should think of it;
     methinks 'tis a pitiful sight.

     CELEBINUS.  'Tis [128] nothing.--Give me a wound, father.

     AMYRAS.  And me another, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Come, sirrah, give me your arm.

     CELEBINUS.  Here, father, cut it bravely, as you did your own.

     TAMBURLAINE.  It shall suffice thou dar'st abide a wound;
     My boy, thou shalt not lose a drop of blood
     Before we meet the army of the Turk;
     But then run desperate through the thickest throngs,
     Dreadless of blows, of bloody wounds, and death;
     And let the burning of Larissa-walls,
     My speech of war, and this my wound you see,
     Teach you, my boys, to bear courageous minds,
     Fit for the followers of great Tamburlaine.--
     Usumcasane, now come, let us march
     Towards Techelles and Theridamas,
     That we have sent before to fire the towns,
     The towers and cities of these hateful Turks,
     And hunt that coward faint-heart runaway,
     With that accursed [129] traitor Almeda,
     Till fire and sword have found them at a bay.

     USUMCASANE.  I long to pierce his [130] bowels with my sword,
     That hath betray'd my gracious sovereign,--
     That curs'd and damned traitor Almeda.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Then let us see if coward Callapine
     Dare levy arms against our puissance,
     That we may tread upon his captive neck,
     And treble all his father's slaveries.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Enter TECHELLES, THERIDAMAS, and their train.

     THERIDAMAS.  Thus have we march'd northward from Tamburlaine,
     Unto the frontier point [131] of Soria; [132]
     And this is Balsera, their chiefest hold,
     Wherein is all the treasure of the land.

     TECHELLES.  Then let us bring our light artillery,
     Minions, falc'nets, and sakers, [133] to the trench,
     Filling the ditches with the walls' wide breach,
     And enter in to seize upon the hold.-- [134]
     How say you, soldiers, shall we not?

     SOLDIERS.  Yes, my lord, yes; come, let's about it.

     THERIDAMAS.  But stay a while; summon a parle, drum.
     It may be they will yield it quietly, [135]
     Knowing two kings, the friends [136] to Tamburlaine,
     Stand at the walls with such a mighty power.
          [A parley sounded.--CAPTAIN appears on the walls,
           with OLYMPIA his wife, and his SON.]

     CAPTAIN.  What require you, my masters?

     THERIDAMAS.  Captain, that thou yield up thy hold to us.

     CAPTAIN.  To you! why, do you [137] think me weary of it?

     TECHELLES.  Nay, captain, thou art weary of thy life,
     If thou withstand the friends of Tamburlaine.

     THERIDAMAS.  These pioners [138] of Argier in Africa,
     Even in [139] the cannon's face, shall raise a hill
     Of earth and faggots higher than thy fort,
     And, over thy argins [140] and cover'd ways,
     Shall play upon the bulwarks of thy hold
     Volleys of ordnance, till the breach be made
     That with his ruin fills up all the trench;
     And, when we enter in, not heaven itself
     Shall ransom thee, thy wife, and family.

     TECHELLES.  Captain, these Moors shall cut the leaden pipes
     That bring fresh water to thy men and thee,
     And lie in trench before thy castle-walls,
     That no supply of victual shall come in,
     Nor [any] issue forth but they shall die;
     And, therefore, captain, yield it quietly. [141]

     CAPTAIN.  Were you, that are the friends of Tamburlaine, [142]
     Brothers of [143] holy Mahomet himself,
     I would not yield it; therefore do your worst:
     Raise mounts, batter, intrench, and undermine,
     Cut off the water, all convoys that can, [144]
     Yet I am [145] resolute:  and so, farewell.
          [CAPTAIN, OLYMPIA, and SON, retire from the walls.]

     THERIDAMAS.  Pioners, away! and where I stuck the stake,
     Intrench with those dimensions I prescrib'd;
     Cast up the earth towards the castle-wall,
     Which, till it may defend you, labour low,
     And few or none shall perish by their shot.

     PIONERS.  We will, my lord.
          [Exeunt PIONERS.]

     TECHELLES.  A hundred horse shall scout about the plains,
     To spy what force comes to relieve the hold.
     Both we, Theridamas, will intrench our men,
     And with the Jacob's staff measure the height
     And distance of the castle from the trench,
     That we may know if our artillery
     Will carry full point-blank unto their walls.

     THERIDAMAS.  Then see the bringing of our ordnance
     Along the trench into [146] the battery,
     Where we will have gallions of six foot broad,
     To save our cannoneers from musket-shot;
     Betwixt which shall our ordnance thunder forth,
     And with the breach's fall, smoke, fire, and dust,
     The crack, the echo, and the soldiers' cry,
     Make deaf the air and dim the crystal sky.

     TECHELLES.  Trumpets and drums, alarum presently!
     And, soldiers, play the men; the hold [147] is yours!
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE IV.

          Alarms within.  Enter the CAPTAIN, with OLYMPIA, and his
          SON.

     OLYMPIA.  Come, good my lord, and let us haste from hence,
     Along the cave that leads beyond the foe:
     No hope is left to save this conquer'd hold.

     CAPTAIN.  A deadly bullet, gliding through my side,
     Lies heavy on my heart; I cannot live:
     I feel my liver pierc'd, and all my veins,
     That there begin and nourish every part,
     Mangled and torn, and all my entrails bath'd
     In blood that straineth [148] from their orifex.
     Farewell, sweet wife! sweet son, farewell! I die.
          [Dies.]

     OLYMPIA.  Death, whither art thou gone, that both we live?
     Come back again, sweet Death, and strike us both!
     One minute and our days, and one sepulchre
     Contain our bodies!  Death, why com'st thou not
     Well, this must be the messenger for thee:
          [Drawing a dagger.]
     Now, ugly Death, stretch out thy sable wings,
     And carry both our souls where his remains.--
     Tell me, sweet boy, art thou content to die?
     These barbarous Scythians, full of cruelty,
     And Moors, in whom was never pity found,
     Will hew us piecemeal, put us to the wheel,
     Or else invent some torture worse than that;
     Therefore die by thy loving mother's hand,
     Who gently now will lance thy ivory throat,
     And quickly rid thee both of pain and life.

     SON.  Mother, despatch me, or I'll kill myself;
     For think you I can live and see him dead?
     Give me your knife, good mother, or strike home: [149]
     The Scythians shall not tyrannize on me:
     Sweet mother, strike, that I may meet my father.
          [She stabs him, and he dies.]

     OLYMPIA.  Ah, sacred Mahomet, if this be sin,
     Entreat a pardon of the God of heaven,
     And purge my soul before it come to thee!
          [She burns the bodies of her HUSBAND and SON,
           and then attempts to kill herself.]

          Enter THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, and all their train.

     THERIDAMAS.  How now, madam! what are you doing?

     OLYMPIA.  Killing myself, as I have done my son,
     Whose body, with his father's, I have burnt,
     Lest cruel Scythians should dismember him.

     TECHELLES.  'Twas bravely done, and like a soldier's wife.
     Thou shalt with us to Tamburlaine the Great,
     Who, when he hears how resolute thou wert, [150]
     Will match thee with a viceroy or a king.

     OLYMPIA.  My lord deceas'd was dearer unto me
     Than any viceroy, king, or emperor;
     And for his sake here will I end my days.

     THERIDAMAS.  But, lady, go with us to Tamburlaine,
     And thou shalt see a man greater than Mahomet,
     In whose high looks is much more majesty,
     Than from the concave superficies
     Of Jove's vast palace, the empyreal orb,
     Unto the shining bower where Cynthia sits,
     Like lovely Thetis, in a crystal robe;
     That treadeth Fortune underneath his feet,
     And makes the mighty god of arms his slave;
     On whom Death and the Fatal Sisters wait
     With naked swords and scarlet liveries;
     Before whom, mounted on a lion's back,
     Rhamnusia bears a helmet full of blood,
     And strows the way with brains of slaughter'd men;
     By whose proud side the ugly Furies run,
     Hearkening when he shall bid them plague the world;
     Over whose zenith, cloth'd in windy air,
     And eagle's wings join'd [151] to her feather'd breast,
     Fame hovereth, sounding of [152] her golden trump,
     That to the adverse poles of that straight line
     Which measureth the glorious frame of heaven
     The name of mighty Tamburlaine is spread;
     And him, fair lady, shall thy eyes behold.
     Come.

     OLYMPIA.  Take pity of a lady's ruthful tears,
     That humbly craves upon her knees to stay,
     And cast her body in the burning flame
     That feeds upon her son's and husband's flesh.

     TECHELLES.  Madam, sooner shall fire consume us both
     Than scorch a face so beautiful as this,
     In frame of which Nature hath shew'd more skill
     Than when she gave eternal chaos form,
     Drawing from it the shining lamps of heaven.

     THERIDAMAS.  Madam, I am so far in love with you,
     That you must go with us:  no remedy.

     OLYMPIA.  Then carry me, I care not, where you will,
     And let the end of this my fatal journey
     Be likewise end to my accursed life.

     TECHELLES.  No, madam, but the [153] beginning of your joy:
     Come willingly therefore.

     THERIDAMAS.  Soldiers, now let us meet the general,
     Who by this time is at Natolia,
     Ready to charge the army of the Turk.
     The gold and [154] silver, and the pearl, ye got,
     Rifling this fort, divide in equal shares:
     This lady shall have twice so much again
     Out of the coffers of our treasury.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE V.

          Enter CALLAPINE, ORCANES, the KINGS OF JERUSALEM, TREBIZON,
          and SORIA, with their train, ALMEDA, and a MESSENGER.

     MESSENGER.  Renowmed [155] emperor, mighty [156] Callapine,
     God's great lieutenant over all the world,
     Here at Aleppo, with an host of men,
     Lies Tamburlaine, this king of Persia,
     (In number more than are the [157] quivering leaves
     Of Ida's forest, where your highness' hounds
     With open cry pursue the wounded stag,)
     Who means to girt Natolia's walls with siege,
     Fire the town, and over-run the land.

     CALLAPINE.  My royal army is as great as his,
     That, from the bounds of Phrygia to the sea
     Which washeth Cyprus with his brinish waves,
     Covers the hills, the valleys, and the plains.
     Viceroys and peers of Turkey, play the men;
     Whet all your [158] swords to mangle Tamburlaine,
     His sons, his captains, and his followers:
     By Mahomet, not one of them shall live!
     The field wherein this battle shall be fought
     For ever term'd [159] the Persians' sepulchre,
     In memory of this our victory.

     ORCANES.  Now he that calls himself the [160] scourge of Jove,
     The emperor of the world, and earthly god,
     Shall end the warlike progress he intends,
     And travel headlong to the lake of hell,
     Where legions of devils (knowing he must die
     Here in Natolia by your [161] highness' hands),
     All brandishing their [162] brands of quenchless fire,
     Stretching their monstrous paws, grin with [163] their teeth,
     And guard the gates to entertain his soul.

     CALLAPINE.  Tell me, viceroys, the number of your men,
     And what our army royal is esteem'd.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  From Palestina and Jerusalem,
     Of Hebrews three score thousand fighting men
     Are come, since last we shew'd your [164] majesty.

     ORCANES.  So from Arabia Desert, and the bounds
     Of that sweet land whose brave metropolis
     Re-edified the fair Semiramis,
     Came forty thousand warlike foot and horse,
     Since last we number'd to your majesty.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  From Trebizon in Asia the Less,
     Naturaliz'd Turks and stout Bithynians
     Came to my bands, full fifty thousand more,
     (That, fighting, know not what retreat doth mean,
     Nor e'er return but with the victory,)
     Since last we number'd to your majesty.

     KING OF SORIA.  Of Sorians [165] from Halla is repair'd, [166]
     And neighbour cities of your highness' land, [167]
     Ten thousand horse, and thirty thousand foot,
     Since last we number'd to your majesty;
     So that the army royal is esteem'd
     Six hundred thousand valiant fighting men.

     CALLAPINE.  Then welcome, Tamburlaine, unto thy death!--
     Come, puissant viceroys, let us to the field
     (The Persians' sepulchre), and sacrifice
     Mountains of breathless men to Mahomet,
     Who now, with Jove, opens the firmament
     To see the slaughter of our enemies.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE with his three SONS, CALYPHAS, AMYRAS,
          and CELEBINUS; USUMCASANE, and others.

     TAMBURLAINE.  How now, Casane! see, a knot of kings,
     Sitting as if they were a-telling riddles!

     USUMCASANE.  My lord, your presence makes them pale and wan:
     Poor souls, they look as if their deaths were near.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Why, so he [168] is, Casane; I am here:
     But yet I'll save their lives, and make them slaves.--
     Ye petty kings of Turkey, I am come,
     As Hector did into the Grecian camp,
     To overdare the pride of Graecia,
     And set his warlike person to the view
     Of fierce Achilles, rival of his fame:
     I do you honour in the simile;
     For, if I should, as Hector did Achilles,
     (The worthiest knight that ever brandish'd sword,)
     Challenge in combat any of you all,
     I see how fearfully ye would refuse,
     And fly my glove as from a scorpion.

     ORCANES.  Now, thou art fearful of thy army's strength,
     Thou wouldst with overmatch of person fight:
     But, shepherd's issue, base-born Tamburlaine,
     Think of thy end; this sword shall lance thy throat.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villain, the shepherd's issue (at whose birth
     Heaven did afford a gracious aspect,
     And join'd those stars that shall be opposite
     Even till the dissolution of the world,
     And never meant to make a conqueror
     So famous as is [169] mighty Tamburlaine)
     Shall so torment thee, and that Callapine,
     That, like a roguish runaway, suborn'd
     That villain there, that slave, that Turkish dog,
     To false his service to his sovereign,
     As ye shall curse the birth of Tamburlaine.

     CALLAPINE.  Rail not, proud Scythian:  I shall now revenge
     My father's vile abuses and mine own.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  By Mahomet, he shall be tied in chains,
     Rowing with Christians in a brigandine
     About the Grecian isles to rob and spoil,
     And turn him to his ancient trade again:
     Methinks the slave should make a lusty thief.

     CALLAPINE.  Nay, when the battle ends, all we will meet,
     And sit in council to invent some pain
     That most may vex his body and his soul.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Sirrah Callapine, I'll hang a clog about
     your neck for running away again:  you shall not
     trouble me thus to come and fetch you.--
     But as for you, viceroy[s], you shall have bits,
     And, harness'd [170] like my horses, draw my coach;
     And, when ye stay, be lash'd with whips of wire:
     I'll have you learn to feed on [171] provender,
     And in a stable lie upon the planks.

     ORCANES.  But, Tamburlaine, first thou shalt [172] kneel to us,
     And humbly crave a pardon for thy life.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  The common soldiers of our mighty host
     Shall bring thee bound unto the [173] general's tent [.]

     KING OF SORIA.  And all have jointly sworn thy cruel death,
     Or bind thee in eternal torments' wrath.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, sirs, diet yourselves; you know I
     shall have occasion shortly to journey you.

     CELEBINUS.  See, father, how Almeda the jailor looks upon us!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villain, traitor, damned fugitive,
     I'll make thee wish the earth had swallow'd thee!
     See'st thou not death within my wrathful looks?
     Go, villain, cast thee headlong from a rock,
     Or rip thy bowels, and rent [174] out thy heart,
     T' appease my wrath; or else I'll torture thee,
     Searing thy hateful flesh with burning irons
     And drops of scalding lead, while all thy joints
     Be rack'd and beat asunder with the wheel;
     For, if thou liv'st, not any element
     Shall shroud thee from the wrath of Tamburlaine.

     CALLAPINE.  Well, in despite of thee, he shall be king.--
     Come, Almeda; receive this crown of me:
     I here invest thee king of Ariadan,
     Bordering on Mare Roso, near to Mecca.

     ORCANES.  What! take it, man.

     ALMEDA.  [to Tamb.] Good my lord, let me take it.

     CALLAPINE.  Dost thou ask him leave? here; take it.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Go to, sirrah! [175] take your crown, and make up
     the half dozen.  So, sirrah, now you are a king, you must give
     arms. [176]

     ORCANES.  So he shall, and wear thy head in his scutcheon.

     TAMBURLAINE.  No; [177] let him hang a bunch of keys on his
     standard, to put him in remembrance he was a jailor, that,
     when I take him, I may knock out his brains with them,
     and lock you in the stable, when you shall come sweating
     from my chariot.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  Away! let us to the field, that the villain
     may be slain.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Sirrah, prepare whips, and bring my chariot
     to my tent; for, as soon as the battle is done, I'll ride
     in triumph through the camp.
          Enter THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, and their train.
     How now, ye petty kings? lo, here are bugs [178]
     Will make the hair stand upright on your heads,
     And cast your crowns in slavery at their feet!--
     Welcome, Theridamas and Techelles, both:
     See ye this rout, [179] and know ye this same king?

     THERIDAMAS.  Ay, my lord; he was Callapine's keeper.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, now ye see he is a king.  Look to him,
     Theridamas, when we are fighting, lest he hide his crown
     as the foolish king of Persia did. [180]

     KING OF SORIA.  No, Tamburlaine; he shall not be put
     to that exigent, I warrant thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.  You know not, sir.--
     But now, my followers and my loving friends,
     Fight as you ever did, like conquerors,
     The glory of this happy day is yours.
     My stern aspect [181] shall make fair Victory,
     Hovering betwixt our armies, light on me,
     Loaden with laurel-wreaths to crown us all.

     TECHELLES.  I smile to think how, when this field is fought
     And rich Natolia ours, our men shall sweat
     With carrying pearl and treasure on their backs.

     TAMBURLAINE.  You shall be princes all, immediately.--
     Come, fight, ye Turks, or yield us victory.

     ORCANES.  No; we will meet thee, slavish Tamburlaine.
          [Exeunt severally.]




ACT IV.




SCENE I.

          Alarms within.  AMYRAS and CELEBINUS issue from the tent
          where CALYPHAS sits asleep. [182]

     AMYRAS.  Now in their glories shine the golden crowns
     Of these proud Turks, much like so many suns
     That half dismay the majesty of heaven.
     Now, brother, follow we our father's sword,
     That flies with fury swifter than our thoughts,
     And cuts down armies with his conquering wings.

     CELEBINUS.  Call forth our lazy brother from the tent,
     For, if my father miss him in the field,
     Wrath, kindled in the furnace of his breast,
     Will send a deadly lightning to his heart.

     AMYRAS.  Brother, ho! what, given so much to sleep,
     You cannot [183] leave it, when our enemies' drums
     And rattling cannons thunder in our ears
     Our proper ruin and our father's foil?

     CALYPHAS.  Away, ye fools! my father needs not me,
     Nor you, in faith, but that you will be thought
     More childish-valourous than manly-wise.
     If half our camp should sit and sleep with me,
     My father were enough to scare [184] the foe:
     You do dishonour to his majesty,
     To think our helps will do him any good.

     AMYRAS.  What, dar'st thou, then, be absent from the fight,
     Knowing my father hates thy cowardice,
     And oft hath warn'd thee to be still in field,
     When he himself amidst the thickest troops
     Beats down our foes, to flesh our taintless swords?

     CALYPHAS.  I know, sir, what it is to kill a man;
     It works remorse of conscience in me.
     I take no pleasure to be murderous,
     Nor care for blood when wine will quench my thirst.

     CELEBINUS.  O cowardly boy! fie, for shame, come forth!
     Thou dost dishonour manhood and thy house.

     CALYPHAS.  Go, go, tall [185] stripling, fight you for us both,
     And take my other toward brother here,
     For person like to prove a second Mars.
     'Twill please my mind as well to hear, both you [186]
     Have won a heap of honour in the field,
     And left your slender carcasses behind,
     As if I lay with you for company.

     AMYRAS.  You will not go, then?

     CALYPHAS.  You say true.

     AMYRAS.  Were all the lofty mounts of Zona Mundi
     That fill the midst of farthest Tartary
     Turn'd into pearl and proffer'd for my stay,
     I would not bide the fury of my father,
     When, made a victor in these haughty arms,
     He comes and finds his sons have had no shares
     In all the honours he propos'd for us.

     CALYPHAS.  Take you the honour, I will take my ease;
     My wisdom shall excuse my cowardice:
     I go into the field before I need!
          [Alarms within.  AMYRAS and CELEBINUS run out.]
     The bullets fly at random where they list;
     And, should I [187] go, and kill a thousand men,
     I were as soon rewarded with a shot,
     And sooner far than he that never fights;
     And, should I go, and do no harm nor good,
     I might have harm, which all the good I have,
     Join'd with my father's crown, would never cure.
     I'll to cards.--Perdicas!

          Enter PERDICAS.

     PERDICAS.  Here, my lord.

     CALYPHAS.
     Come, thou and I will go to cards to drive away the time.

     PERDICAS.  Content, my lord:  but what shall we play for?

     CALYPHAS.  Who shall kiss the fairest of the Turks' concubines
     first, when my father hath conquered them.

     PERDICAS.  Agreed, i'faith.
          [They play.]

     CALYPHAS.  They say I am a coward, Perdicas, and I fear
     as little their taratantaras, their swords, or their cannons
     as I do a naked lady in a net of gold, and, for fear I should be
     afraid, would put it off and come to bed with me.

     PERDICAS.  Such a fear, my lord, would never make ye retire.

     CALYPHAS.  I would my father would let me be put in the front
     of such a battle once, to try my valour!  [Alarms within.]
     What a coil they keep!  I believe there will be some hurt done
     anon amongst them.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE;
          AMYRAS and CELEBINUS leading in ORCANES, and the KINGS
          OF JERUSALEM, TREBIZON, and SORIA; and SOLDIERS.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     See now, ye [188] slaves, my children stoop your pride, [189]
     And lead your bodies [190] sheep-like to the sword!--
     Bring them, my boys, and tell me if the wars
     Be not a life that may illustrate gods,
     And tickle not your spirits with desire
     Still to be train'd in arms and chivalry?

     AMYRAS.  Shall we let go these kings again, my lord,
     To gather greater numbers 'gainst our power,
     That they may say, it is not chance doth this,
     But matchless strength and magnanimity?

     TAMBURLAINE.  No, no, Amyras; tempt not Fortune so:
     Cherish thy valour still with fresh supplies,
     And glut it not with stale and daunted foes.
     But where's this coward villain, not my son,
     But traitor to my name and majesty?
          [He goes in and brings CALYPHAS out.]
     Image of sloth, and picture of a slave,
     The obloquy and scorn of my renown!
     How may my heart, thus fired with mine [191] eyes,
     Wounded with shame and kill'd with discontent,
     Shroud any thought may [192] hold my striving hands
     ]From martial justice on thy wretched soul?

     THERIDAMAS.  Yet pardon him, I pray your majesty.

     TECHELLES and USUMCASANE.
     Let all of us entreat your highness' pardon.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Stand up, [193] ye base, unworthy soldiers!
     Know ye not yet the argument of arms?

     AMYRAS.  Good my lord, let him be forgiven for once, [194]
     And we will force him to the field hereafter.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Stand up, my boys, and I will teach ye arms,
     And what the jealousy of wars must do.--
     O Samarcanda, where I breathed first,
     And joy'd the fire of this martial [195] flesh,
     Blush, blush, fair city, at thine [196] honour's foil,
     And shame of nature, which [197] Jaertis' [198] stream,
     Embracing thee with deepest of his love,
     Can never wash from thy distained brows!--
     Here, Jove, receive his fainting soul again;
     A form not meet to give that subject essence
     Whose matter is the flesh of Tamburlaine,
     Wherein an incorporeal [199] spirit moves,
     Made of the mould whereof thyself consists,
     Which makes me valiant, proud, ambitious,
     Ready to levy power against thy throne,
     That I might move the turning spheres of heaven;
     For earth and all this airy region
     Cannot contain the state of Tamburlaine.
          [Stabs CALYPHAS.]
     By Mahomet, thy mighty friend, I swear,
     In sending to my issue such a soul,
     Created of the massy dregs of earth,
     The scum and tartar of the elements,
     Wherein was neither courage, strength, or wit,
     But folly, sloth, and damned idleness,
     Thou hast procur'd a greater enemy
     Than he that darted mountains at thy head,
     Shaking the burden mighty Atlas bears,
     Whereat thou trembling hidd'st thee in the air,
     Cloth'd with a pitchy cloud for being seen.-- [200]
     And now, ye canker'd curs of Asia,
     That will not see the strength of Tamburlaine,
     Although it shine as brightly as the sun,
     Now you shall [201] feel the strength of Tamburlaine,
     And, by the state of his supremacy,
     Approve [202] the difference 'twixt himself and you.

     ORCANES.  Thou shew'st the difference 'twixt ourselves and thee,
     In this thy barbarous damned tyranny.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Thy victories are grown so violent,
     That shortly heaven, fill'd with the meteors
     Of blood and fire thy tyrannies have made,
     Will pour down blood and fire on thy head,
     Whose scalding drops will pierce thy seething brains,
     And, with our bloods, revenge our bloods [203] on thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villains, these terrors, and these tyrannies
     (If tyrannies war's justice ye repute),
     I execute, enjoin'd me from above,
     To scourge the pride of such as Heaven abhors;
     Nor am I made arch-monarch of the world,
     Crown'd and invested by the hand of Jove,
     For deeds of bounty or nobility;
     But, since I exercise a greater name,
     The scourge of God and terror of the world,
     I must apply myself to fit those terms,
     In war, in blood, in death, in cruelty,
     And plague such peasants [204] as resist in [205] me
     The power of Heaven's eternal majesty.--
     Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane, [206]
     Ransack the tents and the pavilions
     Of these proud Turks, and take their concubines,
     Making them bury this effeminate brat;
     For not a common soldier shall defile
     His manly fingers with so faint a boy:
     Then bring those Turkish harlots to my tent,
     And I'll dispose them as it likes me best.--
     Meanwhile, take him in.

     SOLDIERS.  We will, my lord.
          [Exeunt with the body of CALYPHAS.]

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  O damned monster! nay, a fiend of hell,
     Whose cruelties are not so harsh as thine,
     Nor yet impos'd with such a bitter hate!

     ORCANES.  Revenge it, [207] Rhadamanth and Aeacus,
     And let your hates, extended in his pains,
     Excel [208] the hate wherewith he pains our souls!

     KING OF TREBIZON.  May never day give virtue to his eyes,
     Whose sight, compos'd of fury and of fire,
     Doth send such stern affections to his heart!

     KING OF SORIA.  May never spirit, vein, or artier, [209] feed
     The cursed substance of that cruel heart;
     But, wanting moisture and remorseful [210] blood,
     Dry up with anger, and consume with heat!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, bark, ye dogs:  I'll bridle all your tongues,
     And bind them close with bits of burnish'd steel,
     Down to the channels of your hateful throats;
     And, with the pains my rigour shall inflict,
     I'll make ye roar, that earth may echo forth
     The far-resounding torments ye sustain;
     As when an herd of lusty Cimbrian bulls
     Run mourning round about the females' miss, [211]
     And, stung with fury of their following,
     Fill all the air with troublous bellowing.
     I will, with engines never exercis'd,
     Conquer, sack, and utterly consume
     Your cities and your golden palaces,
     And, with the flames that beat against the clouds,
     Incense the heavens, and make the stars to melt,
     As if they were the tears of Mahomet
     For hot consumption of his country's pride;
     And, till by vision or by speech I hear
     Immortal Jove say "Cease, my Tamburlaine,"
     I will persist a terror to the world,
     Making the meteors (that, like armed men,
     Are seen to march upon the towers of heaven)
     Run tilting round about the firmament,
     And break their burning lances in the air,
     For honour of my wondrous victories.--
     Come, bring them in to our pavilion.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter OLYMPIA.

     OLYMPIA.  Distress'd Olympia, whose weeping eyes,
     Since thy arrival here, behold [212] no sun,
     But, clos'd within the compass of a [213] tent,
     Have [214] stain'd thy cheeks, and made thee look like death,
     Devise some means to rid thee of thy life,
     Rather than yield to his detested suit,
     Whose drift is only to dishonour thee;
     And, since this earth, dew'd with thy brinish tears,
     Affords no herbs whose taste may poison thee,
     Nor yet this air, beat often with thy sighs,
     Contagious smells and vapours to infect thee,
     Nor thy close cave a sword to murder thee,
     Let this invention be the instrument.

          Enter THERIDAMAS.

     THERIDAMAS.  Well met, Olympia:  I sought thee in my tent,
     But, when I saw the place obscure and dark,
     Which with thy beauty thou wast wont to light,
     Enrag'd, I ran about the fields for thee,
     Supposing amorous Jove had sent his son,
     The winged Hermes, to convey thee hence;
     But now I find thee, and that fear is past,
     Tell me, Olympia, wilt thou grant my suit?

     OLYMPIA.  My lord and husband's death, with my sweet son's,
     (With whom I buried all affections
     Save grief and sorrow, which torment my heart,)
     Forbids my mind to entertain a thought
     That tends to love, but meditate on death,
     A fitter subject for a pensive soul.

     THERIDAMAS.  Olympia, pity him in whom thy looks
     Have greater operation and more force
     Than Cynthia's in the watery wilderness;
     For with thy view my joys are at the full,
     And ebb again as thou depart'st from me.

     OLYMPIA.  Ah, pity me, my lord, and draw your sword,
     Making a passage for my troubled soul,
     Which beats against this prison to get out,
     And meet my husband and my loving son!

     THERIDAMAS.  Nothing but still thy husband and thy son?
     Leave this, my love, and listen more to me:
     Thou shalt be stately queen of fair Argier;
     And, cloth'd in costly cloth of massy gold,
     Upon the marble turrets of my court
     Sit like to Venus in her chair of state,
     Commanding all thy princely eye desires;
     And I will cast off arms to [215] sit with thee,
     Spending my life in sweet discourse of love.

     OLYMPIA.  No such discourse is pleasant in [216] mine ears,
     But that where every period ends with death,
     And every line begins with death again:
     I cannot love, to be an emperess.

     THERIDAMAS.  Nay, lady, then, if nothing will prevail,
     I'll use some other means to make you yield:
     Such is the sudden fury of my love,
     I must and will be pleas'd, and you shall yield:
     Come to the tent again.

     OLYMPIA.  Stay now, my lord; and, will you [217] save my honour,
     I'll give your grace a present of such price
     As all the world can not afford the like.

     THERIDAMAS.  What is it?

     OLYMPIA.  An ointment which a cunning alchymist
     Distilled from the purest balsamum
     And simplest extracts of all minerals,
     In which the essential form of marble stone,
     Temper'd by science metaphysical,
     And spells of magic from the mouths [218] of spirits,
     With which if you but 'noint your tender skin,
     Nor pistol, sword, nor lance, can pierce your flesh.

     THERIDAMAS.  Why, madam, think you to mock me thus palpably?

     OLYMPIA.  To prove it, I will 'noint my naked throat,
     Which when you stab, look on your weapon's point,
     And you shall see't rebated [219] with the blow.

     THERIDAMAS.  Why gave you not your husband some of it,
     If you lov'd him, and it so precious?

     OLYMPIA.  My purpose was, my lord, to spend it so,
     But was prevented by his sudden end;
     And for a present easy proof thereof, [220]
     That I dissemble not, try it on me.

     THERIDAMAS.  I will, Olympia, and will [221] keep it for
     The richest present of this eastern world.
          [She anoints her throat. [222]]

     OLYMPIA.  Now stab, my lord, and mark your weapon's point,
     That will be blunted if the blow be great.

     THERIDAMAS.  Here, then, Olympia.--
          [Stabs her.]
     What, have I slain her?  Villain, stab thyself!
     Cut off this arm that at murdered my [223] love,
     In whom the learned Rabbis of this age
     Might find as many wondrous miracles
     As in the theoria of the world!
     Now hell is fairer than Elysium; [224]
     A greater lamp than that bright eye of heaven,
     ]From whence the stars do borrow [225] all their light,
     Wanders about the black circumference;
     And now the damned souls are free from pain,
     For every Fury gazeth on her looks;
     Infernal Dis is courting of my love,
     Inventing masks and stately shows for her,
     Opening the doors of his rich treasury
     To entertain this queen of chastity;
     Whose body shall be tomb'd with all the pomp
     The treasure of my [226] kingdom may afford.
          [Exit with the body.]




SCENE III.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, drawn in his chariot by the KINGS OF
          TREBIZON and SORIA, [227] with bits in their mouths,
          reins in his [228] left hand, and in his right hand a whip
          with which he scourgeth them; AMYRAS, CELEBINUS, TECHELLES,
          THERIDAMAS, USUMCASANE; ORCANES king of Natolia, and the
          KING OF JERUSALEM, led by five [229] or six common SOLDIERS;
          and other SOLDIERS.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Holla, ye pamper'd jades of Asia! [230]
     What, can ye draw but twenty miles a-day,
     And have so proud a chariot at your heels,
     And such a coachman as great Tamburlaine,
     But from Asphaltis, where I conquer'd you,
     To Byron here, where thus I honour you?
     The horse that guide the golden eye of heaven,
     And blow the morning from their nostrils, [231]
     Making their fiery gait above the clouds,
     Are not so honour'd in [232] their governor
     As you, ye slaves, in mighty Tamburlaine.
     The headstrong jades of Thrace Alcides tam'd,
     That King Aegeus fed with human flesh,
     And made so wanton that they knew their strengths,
     Were not subdu'd with valour more divine
     Than you by this unconquer'd arm of mine.
     To make you fierce, and fit my appetite,
     You shall be fed with flesh as raw as blood,
     And drink in pails the strongest muscadel:
     If you can live with it, then live, and draw
     My chariot swifter than the racking [233] clouds;
     If not, then die like beasts, and fit for naught
     But perches for the black and fatal ravens.
     Thus am I right the scourge of highest Jove;
     And see the figure of my dignity,
     By which I hold my name and majesty!

     AMYRAS.  Let me have coach, [234] my lord, that I may ride,
     And thus be drawn by [235] these two idle kings.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thy youth forbids such ease, my kingly boy:
     They shall to-morrow draw my chariot,
     While these their fellow-kings may be refresh'd.

     ORCANES.  O thou that sway'st the region under earth,
     And art a king as absolute as Jove,
     Come as thou didst in fruitful Sicily,
     Surveying all the glories of the land,
     And as thou took'st the fair Proserpina,
     Joying the fruit of Ceres' garden-plot, [236]
     For love, for honour, and to make her queen,
     So, for just hate, for shame, and to subdue
     This proud contemner of thy dreadful power,
     Come once in fury, and survey his pride,
     Haling him headlong to the lowest hell!

     THERIDAMAS.  Your majesty must get some bits for these,
     To bridle their contemptuous cursing tongues,
     That, like unruly never-broken jades,
     Break through the hedges of their hateful mouths,
     And pass their fixed bounds exceedingly.

     TECHELLES.  Nay, we will break the hedges of their mouths,
     And pull their kicking colts [237] out of their pastures.

     USUMCASANE.  Your majesty already hath devis'd
     A mean, as fit as may be, to restrain
     These coltish coach-horse tongues from blasphemy.

     CELEBINUS.  How like you that, sir king? why speak you not?

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Ah, cruel brat, sprung from a tyrant's loins!
     How like his cursed father he begins
     To practice taunts and bitter tyrannies!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Ay, Turk, I tell thee, this same [238] boy is he
     That must (advanc'd in higher pomp than this)
     Rifle the kingdoms I shall leave unsack'd,
     If Jove, esteeming me too good for earth,
     Raise me, to match [239] the fair Aldeboran,
     Above [240] the threefold astracism of heaven,
     Before I conquer all the triple world.--
     Now fetch me out the Turkish concubines:
     I will prefer them for the funeral
     They have bestow'd on my abortive son.
          [The CONCUBINES are brought in.]
     Where are my common soldiers now, that fought
     So lion-like upon Asphaltis' plains?

     SOLDIERS.  Here, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Hold ye, tall [241] soldiers, take ye queens a-piece,--
     I mean such queens as were kings' concubines;
     Take them; divide them, and their [242] jewels too,
     And let them equally serve all your turns.

     SOLDIERS.  We thank your majesty.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Brawl not, I warn you, for your lechery;
     For every man that so offends shall die.

     ORCANES.  Injurious tyrant, wilt thou so defame
     The hateful fortunes of thy victory,
     To exercise upon such guiltless dames
     The violence of thy common soldiers' lust?

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Live continent, [243] then, ye slaves, and meet not me
     With troops of harlots at your slothful heels.

     CONCUBINES.  O, pity us, my lord, and save our honours!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Are ye not gone, ye villains, with your spoils?
          [The SOLDIERS run away with the CONCUBINES.]

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  O, merciless, infernal cruelty!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Save your honours! 'twere but time indeed,
     Lost long before ye knew what honour meant.

     THERIDAMAS.  It seems they meant to conquer us, my lord,
     And make us jesting pageants for their trulls.

     TAMBURLAINE.  And now themselves shall make our pageant,
     And common soldiers jest [244] with all their trulls.
     Let them take pleasure soundly in their spoils,
     Till we prepare our march to Babylon,
     Whither we next make expedition.

     TECHELLES.  Let us not be idle, then, my lord,
     But presently be prest [245] to conquer it.

     TAMBURLAINE.  We will, Techelles.--Forward, then, ye jades!
     Now crouch, ye kings of greatest Asia,
     And tremble, when ye hear this scourge will come
     That whips down cities and controlleth crowns,
     Adding their wealth and treasure to my store.
     The Euxine sea, north to Natolia;
     The Terrene, [246] west; the Caspian, north northeast;
     And on the south, Sinus Arabicus;
     Shall all [247] be loaden with the martial spoils
     We will convey with us to Persia.
     Then shall my native city Samarcanda,
     And crystal waves of fresh Jaertis' [248] stream,
     The pride and beauty of her princely seat,
     Be famous through the furthest [249] continents;
     For there my palace royal shall be plac'd,
     Whose shining turrets shall dismay the heavens,
     And cast the fame of Ilion's tower to hell:
     Thorough [250] the streets, with troops of conquer'd kings,
     I'll ride in golden armour like the sun;
     And in my helm a triple plume shall spring,
     Spangled with diamonds, dancing in the air,
     To note me emperor of the three-fold world;
     Like to an almond-tree [251] y-mounted [252] high
     Upon the lofty and celestial mount
     Of ever-green Selinus, [253] quaintly deck'd
     With blooms more white than Erycina's [254] brows, [255]
     Whose tender blossoms tremble every one
     At every little breath that thorough heaven [256] is blown.
     Then in my coach, like Saturn's royal son
     Mounted his shining chariot [257] gilt with fire,
     And drawn with princely eagles through the path
     Pav'd with bright crystal and enchas'd with stars,
     When all the gods stand gazing at his pomp,
     So will I ride through Samarcanda-streets,
     Until my soul, dissever'd from this flesh,
     Shall mount the milk-white way, and meet him there.
     To Babylon, my lords, to Babylon!
          [Exeunt.]




ACT V.




SCENE I.

          Enter the GOVERNOR OF BABYLON, MAXIMUS, and others, upon
          the walls.

     GOVERNOR.  What saith Maximus?

     MAXIMUS.  My lord, the breach the enemy hath made
     Gives such assurance of our overthrow,
     That little hope is left to save our lives,
     Or hold our city from the conqueror's hands.
     Then hang out [258] flags, my lord, of humble truce,
     And satisfy the people's general prayers,
     That Tamburlaine's intolerable wrath
     May be suppress'd by our submission.

     GOVERNOR.  Villain, respect'st thou [259] more thy slavish life
     Than honour of thy country or thy name?
     Is not my life and state as dear to me,
     The city and my native country's weal,
     As any thing of [260] price with thy conceit?
     Have we not hope, for all our batter'd walls,
     To live secure and keep his forces out,
     When this our famous lake of Limnasphaltis
     Makes walls a-fresh with every thing that falls
     Into the liquid substance of his stream,
     More strong than are the gates of death or hell?
     What faintness should dismay our courages,
     When we are thus defenc'd against our foe,
     And have no terror but his threatening looks?

          Enter, above, a CITIZEN, who kneels to the GOVERNOR.

     CITIZEN.  My lord, if ever you did deed of ruth,
     And now will work a refuge to our lives,
     Offer submission, hang up flags of truce,
     That Tamburlaine may pity our distress,
     And use us like a loving conqueror.
     Though this be held his last day's dreadful siege,
     Wherein he spareth neither man nor child,
     Yet are there Christians of Georgia here,
     Whose state he [261] ever pitied and reliev'd,
     Will get his pardon, if your grace would send.

     GOVERNOR.  How [262] is my soul environed!
     And this eterniz'd [263] city Babylon
     Fill'd with a pack of faint-heart fugitives
     That thus entreat their shame and servitude!

          Enter, above, a SECOND CITIZEN.

     SECOND CITIZEN.  My lord, if ever you will win our hearts,
     Yield up the town, and [264] save our wives and children;
     For I will cast myself from off these walls,
     Or die some death of quickest violence,
     Before I bide the wrath of Tamburlaine.

     GOVERNOR.  Villains, cowards, traitors to our state!
     Fall to the earth, and pierce the pit of hell,
     That legions of tormenting spirits may vex
     Your slavish bosoms with continual pains!
     I care not, nor the town will never yield
     As long as any life is in my breast.

          Enter THERIDAMAS and TECHELLES, with SOLDIERS.

     THERIDAMAS.  Thou desperate governor of Babylon,
     To save thy life, and us a little labour,
     Yield speedily the city to our hands,
     Or else be sure thou shalt be forc'd with pains
     More exquisite than ever traitor felt.

     GOVERNOR.  Tyrant, I turn the traitor in thy throat,
     And will defend it in despite of thee.--
     Call up the soldiers to defend these walls.

     TECHELLES.  Yield, foolish governor; we offer more
     Than ever yet we did to such proud slaves
     As durst resist us till our third day's siege.
     Thou seest us prest [265] to give the last assault,
     And that shall bide no more regard of parle. [266]

     GOVERNOR.  Assault and spare not; we will never yield.
          [Alarms:  and they scale the walls.]

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, drawn in his chariot (as before) by the
          KINGS OF TREBIZON and SORIA; AMYRAS, CELEBINUS, USUMCASANE;
          ORCANES king of Natolia, and the KING OF JERUSALEM, led by
          SOLDIERS; [267] and others.

     TAMBURLAINE.  The stately buildings of fair Babylon,
     Whose lofty pillars, higher than the clouds,
     Were wont to guide the seaman in the deep,
     Being carried thither by the cannon's force,
     Now fill the mouth of Limnasphaltis' lake,
     And make a bridge unto the batter'd walls.
     Where Belus, Ninus, and great Alexander
     Have rode in triumph, triumphs Tamburlaine,
     Whose chariot-wheels have burst [268] th' Assyrians' bones,
     Drawn with these kings on heaps of carcasses.
     Now in the place, where fair Semiramis,
     Courted by kings and peers of Asia,
     Hath trod the measures, [269] do my soldiers march;
     And in the streets, where brave Assyrian dames
     Have rid in pomp like rich Saturnia,
     With furious words and frowning visages
     My horsemen brandish their unruly blades.
          Re-enter THERIDAMAS and TECHELLES, bringing in the
          GOVERNOR OF BABYLON.
     Who have ye there, my lords?

     THERIDAMAS.  The sturdy governor of Babylon,
     That made us all the labour for the town,
     And us'd such slender reckoning of [270] your majesty.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Go, bind the villain; he shall hang in chains
     Upon the ruins of this conquer'd town.--
     Sirrah, the view of our vermilion tents
     (Which threaten'd more than if the region
     Next underneath the element of fire
     Were full of comets and of blazing stars,
     Whose flaming trains should reach down to the earth)
     Could not affright you; no, nor I myself,
     The wrathful messenger of mighty Jove,
     That with his sword hath quail'd all earthly kings,
     Could not persuade you to submission,
     But still the ports [271] were shut:  villain, I say,
     Should I but touch the rusty gates of hell,
     The triple-headed Cerberus would howl,
     And make [272] black Jove to crouch and kneel to me;
     But I have sent volleys of shot to you,
     Yet could not enter till the breach was made.

     GOVERNOR.  Nor, if my body could have stopt the breach,
     Shouldst thou have enter'd, cruel Tamburlaine.
     'Tis not thy bloody tents can make me yield,
     Nor yet thyself, the anger of the Highest;
     For, though thy cannon shook the city-walls, [273]
     My heart did never quake, or courage faint.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, now I'll make it quake.--Go draw him [274] up,
     Hang him in [275] chains upon the city-walls,
     And let my soldiers shoot the slave to death.

     GOVERNOR.  Vile monster, born of some infernal hag,
     And sent from hell to tyrannize on earth,
     Do all thy worst; nor death, nor Tamburlaine,
     Torture, or pain, can daunt my dreadless mind.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Up with him, then! his body shall be scar'd. [276]

     GOVERNOR.  But, Tamburlaine, in Limnasphaltis' lake
     There lies more gold than Babylon is worth,
     Which, when the city was besieg'd, I hid:
     Save but my life, and I will give it thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Then, for all your valour, you would save your life?
     Whereabout lies it?

     GOVERNOR.  Under a hollow bank, right opposite
     Against the western gate of Babylon.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Go thither, some of you, and take his gold:--
          [Exeunt some ATTENDANTS.]
     The rest forward with execution.
     Away with him hence, let him speak no more.--
     I think I make your courage something quail.--
          [Exeunt ATTENDANTS with the GOVERNOR or BABYLON.]
     When this is done, we'll march from Babylon,
     And make our greatest haste to Persia.
     These jades are broken-winded and half-tir'd;
     Unharness them, and let me have fresh horse.
          [ATTENDANTS unharness the KINGS or TREBIZON and SORIA]
     So; now their best is done to honour me,
     Take them and hang them both up presently.

     KING OF TREBIZON.
     Vile [277] tyrant! barbarous bloody Tamburlaine!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Take them away, Theridamas; see them despatch'd.

     THERIDAMAS.  I will, my lord.
          [Exit with the KINGS or TREBIZON and SORIA.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Come, Asian viceroys; to your tasks a while,
     And take such fortune as your fellows felt.

     ORCANES.  First let thy Scythian horse tear both our limbs,
     Rather than we should draw thy chariot,
     And, like base slaves, abject our princely minds
     To vile and ignominious servitude.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Rather lend me thy weapon, Tamburlaine,
     That I may sheathe it in this breast of mine.
     A thousand deaths could not torment our hearts
     More than the thought of this doth vex our souls.

     AMYRAS.
     They will talk still, my lord, if you do not bridle them.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Bridle them, and let me to my coach.

          [ATTENDANTS bridle ORCANES king of Natolia, and the
          KING OF JERUSALEM, and harness them to the chariot.--
          The GOVERNOR OF BABYLON appears hanging in chains
          on the walls.--Re-enter THERIDAMAS.]

     AMYRAS.  See, now, my lord, how brave the captain hangs!

     TAMBURLAINE.  'Tis brave indeed, my boy:--well done!--
     Shoot first, my lord, and then the rest shall follow.

     THERIDAMAS.  Then have at him, to begin withal.
          [THERIDAMAS shoots at the GOVERNOR.]

     GOVERNOR.  Yet save my life, and let this wound appease
     The mortal fury of great Tamburlaine!

     TAMBURLAINE.  No, though Asphaltis' lake were liquid gold,
     And offer'd me as ransom for thy life,
     Yet shouldst thou die.--Shoot at him all at once.
          [They shoot.]
     So, now he hangs like Bagdet's [278] governor,
     Having as many bullets in his flesh
     As there be breaches in her batter'd wall.
     Go now, and bind the burghers hand and foot,
     And cast them headlong in the city's lake.
     Tartars and Persians shall inhabit there;
     And, to command the city, I will build
     A citadel, [279] that all Africa,
     Which hath been subject to the Persian king,
     Shall pay me tribute for in Babylon.

     TECHELLES.
     What shall be done with their wives and children, my lord?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Techelles, drown them all, man, woman, and child;
     Leave not a Babylonian in the town.

     TECHELLES.  I will about it straight.--Come, soldiers.
          [Exit with SOLDIERS.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now, Casane, where's the Turkish Alcoran,
     And all the heaps of superstitious books
     Found in the temples of that Mahomet
     Whom I have thought a god? they shall be burnt.

     USUMCASANE.  Here they are, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well said! [280] let there be a fire presently.
          [They light a fire.]
     In vain, I see, men worship Mahomet:
     My sword hath sent millions of Turks to hell,
     Slew all his priests, his kinsmen, and his friends,
     And yet I live untouch'd by Mahomet.
     There is a God, full of revenging wrath,
     ]From whom the thunder and the lightning breaks,
     Whose scourge I am, and him will I [281] obey.
     So, Casane; fling them in the fire.--
          [They burn the books.]
     Now, Mahomet, if thou have any power,
     Come down thyself and work a miracle:
     Thou art not worthy to be worshipped
     That suffer'st [282] flames of fire to burn the writ
     Wherein the sum of thy religion rests:
     Why send'st [283] thou not a furious whirlwind down,
     To blow thy Alcoran up to thy throne,
     Where men report thou sitt'st [284] by God himself?
     Or vengeance on the head [285] of Tamburlaine
     That shakes his sword against thy majesty,
     And spurns the abstracts of thy foolish laws?--
     Well, soldiers, Mahomet remains in hell;
     He cannot hear the voice of Tamburlaine:
     Seek out another godhead to adore;
     The God that sits in heaven, if any god,
     For he is God alone, and none but he.

          Re-enter TECHELLES.

     TECHELLES.  I have fulfill'd your highness' will, my lord:
     Thousands of men, drown'd in Asphaltis' lake,
     Have made the water swell above the banks,
     And fishes, fed [286] by human carcasses,
     Amaz'd, swim up and down upon [287] the waves,
     As when they swallow assafoetida,
     Which makes them fleet [288] aloft and gape [289] for air.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, then, my friendly lords, what now remains,
     But that we leave sufficient garrison,
     And presently depart to Persia,
     To triumph after all our victories?

     THERIDAMAS.  Ay, good my lord, let us in [290] haste to Persia;
     And let this captain be remov'd the walls
     To some high hill about the city here.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Let it be so;--about it, soldiers;--
     But stay; I feel myself distemper'd suddenly.

     TECHELLES.  What is it dares distemper Tamburlaine?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Something, Techelles; but I know not what.--
     But, forth, ye vassals! [291] whatsoe'er [292] it be,
     Sickness or death can never conquer me.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter CALLAPINE, KING OF AMASIA, a CAPTAIN, and train,
          with drums and trumpets.

     CALLAPINE.  King of Amasia, now our mighty host
     Marcheth in Asia Major, where the streams
     Of Euphrates [293] and Tigris swiftly run;
     And here may we [294] behold great Babylon,
     Circled about with Limnasphaltis' lake,
     Where Tamburlaine with all his army lies,
     Which being faint and weary with the siege,
     We may lie ready to encounter him
     Before his host be full from Babylon,
     And so revenge our latest grievous loss,
     If God or Mahomet send any aid.

     KING OF AMASIA.  Doubt not, my lord, but we shall conquer him:
     The monster that hath drunk a sea of blood,
     And yet gapes still for more to quench his thirst,
     Our Turkish swords shall headlong send to hell;
     And that vile carcass, drawn by warlike kings,
     The fowls shall eat; for never sepulchre
     Shall grace this [295] base-born tyrant Tamburlaine.

     CALLAPINE.  When I record [296] my parents' slavish life,
     Their cruel death, mine own captivity,
     My viceroys' bondage under Tamburlaine,
     Methinks I could sustain a thousand deaths,
     To be reveng'd of all his villany.--
     Ah, sacred Mahomet, thou that hast seen
     Millions of Turks perish by Tamburlaine,
     Kingdoms made waste, brave cities sack'd and burnt,
     And but one host is left to honour thee,
     Aid [297] thy obedient servant Callapine,
     And make him, after all these overthrows,
     To triumph over cursed Tamburlaine!

     KING OF AMASIA.  Fear not, my lord:  I see great Mahomet,
     Clothed in purple clouds, and on his head
     A chaplet brighter than Apollo's crown,
     Marching about the air with armed men,
     To join with you against this Tamburlaine.

     CAPTAIN.  Renowmed [298] general, mighty Callapine,
     Though God himself and holy Mahomet
     Should come in person to resist your power,
     Yet might your mighty host encounter all,
     And pull proud Tamburlaine upon his knees
     To sue for mercy at your highness' feet.

     CALLAPINE.  Captain, the force of Tamburlaine is great,
     His fortune greater, and the victories
     Wherewith he hath so sore dismay'd the world
     Are greatest to discourage all our drifts;
     Yet, when the pride of Cynthia is at full,
     She wanes again; and so shall his, I hope;
     For we have here the chief selected men
     Of twenty several kingdoms at the least;
     Nor ploughman, priest, nor merchant, stays at home;
     All Turkey is in arms with Callapine;
     And never will we sunder camps and arms
     Before himself or his be conquered:
     This is the time that must eternize me
     For conquering the tyrant of the world.
     Come, soldiers, let us lie in wait for him,
     And, if we find him absent from his camp,
     Or that it be rejoin'd again at full,
     Assail it, and be sure of victory.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Enter THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, and USUMCASANE.

     THERIDAMAS.  Weep, heavens, and vanish into liquid tears!
     Fall, stars that govern his nativity,
     And summon all the shining lamps of heaven
     To cast their bootless fires to the earth,
     And shed their feeble influence in the air;
     Muffle your beauties with eternal clouds;
     For Hell and Darkness pitch their pitchy tents,
     And Death, with armies of Cimmerian spirits,
     Gives battle 'gainst the heart of Tamburlaine!
     Now, in defiance of that wonted love
     Your sacred virtues pour'd upon his throne,
     And made his state an honour to the heavens,
     These cowards invisibly [299] assail his soul,
     And threaten conquest on our sovereign;
     But, if he die, your glories are disgrac'd,
     Earth droops, and says that hell in heaven is plac'd!

     TECHELLES.  O, then, ye powers that sway eternal seats,
     And guide this massy substance of the earth,
     If you retain desert of holiness,
     As your supreme estates instruct our thoughts,
     Be not inconstant, careless of your fame,
     Bear not the burden of your enemies' joys,
     Triumphing in his fall whom you advanc'd;
     But, as his birth, life, health, and majesty
     Were strangely blest and governed by heaven,
     So honour, heaven, (till heaven dissolved be,)
     His birth, his life, his health, and majesty!

     USUMCASANE.  Blush, heaven, to lose the honour of thy name,
     To see thy footstool set upon thy head;
     And let no baseness in thy haughty breast
     Sustain a shame of such inexcellence, [300]
     To see the devils mount in angels' thrones,
     And angels dive into the pools of hell!
     And, though they think their painful date is out,
     And that their power is puissant as Jove's,
     Which makes them manage arms against thy state,
     Yet make them feel the strength of Tamburlaine
     (Thy instrument and note of majesty)
     Is greater far than they can thus subdue;
     For, if he die, thy glory is disgrac'd,
     Earth droops, and says that hell in heaven is plac'd!

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, [301] drawn in his chariot (as before)
          by ORCANES king of Natolia, and the KING OF JERUSALEM,
          AMYRAS, CELEBINUS, and Physicians.

     TAMBURLAINE.  What daring god torments my body thus,
     And seeks to conquer mighty Tamburlaine?
     Shall sickness prove me now to be a man,
     That have been term'd the terror of the world?
     Techelles and the rest, come, take your swords,
     And threaten him whose hand afflicts my soul:
     Come, let us march against the powers of heaven,
     And set black streamers in the firmament,
     To signify the slaughter of the gods.
     Ah, friends, what shall I do? I cannot stand.
     Come, carry me to war against the gods,
     That thus envy the health of Tamburlaine.

     THERIDAMAS.  Ah, good my lord, leave these impatient words,
     Which add much danger to your malady!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Why, shall I sit and languish in this pain?
     No, strike the drums, and, in revenge of this,
     Come, let us charge our spears, and pierce his breast
     Whose shoulders bear the axis of the world,
     That, if I perish, heaven and earth may fade.
     Theridamas, haste to the court of Jove;
     Will him to send Apollo hither straight,
     To cure me, or I'll fetch him down myself.

     TECHELLES.
     Sit still, my gracious lord; this grief will cease, [302]
     And cannot last, it is so violent.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Not last, Techelles! no, for I shall die.
     See, where my slave, the ugly monster Death,
     Shaking and quivering, pale and wan for fear,
     Stands aiming at me with his murdering dart,
     Who flies away at every glance I give,
     And, when I look away, comes stealing on!--
     Villain, away, and hie thee to the field!
     I and mine army come to load thy back
     With souls of thousand mangled carcasses.--
     Look, where he goes! but, see, he comes again,
     Because I stay!  Techelles, let us march,
     And weary Death with bearing souls to hell.

     FIRST PHYSICIAN.  Pleaseth your majesty to drink this potion,
     Which will abate the fury of your fit,
     And cause some milder spirits govern you.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Tell me what think you of my sickness now?

     FIRST PHYSICIAN.  I view'd your urine, and the hypostasis, [303]
     Thick and obscure, doth make your danger great:
     Your veins are full of accidental heat,
     Whereby the moisture of your blood is dried:
     The humidum and calor, which some hold
     Is not a parcel of the elements,
     But of a substance more divine and pure,
     Is almost clean extinguished and spent;
     Which, being the cause of life, imports your death:
     Besides, my lord, this day is critical,
     Dangerous to those whose crisis is as yours:
     Your artiers, [304] which alongst the veins convey
     The lively spirits which the heart engenders,
     Are parch'd and void of spirit, that the soul,
     Wanting those organons by which it moves,
     Cannot endure, by argument of art.
     Yet, if your majesty may escape this day,
     No doubt but you shall soon recover all.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Then will I comfort all my vital parts,
     And live, in spite of death, above a day.
          [Alarms within.]

          Enter a Messenger.

     MESSENGER.  My lord, young Callapine, that lately fled
     from your majesty, hath now gathered a fresh army, and,
     hearing your absence in the field, offers to set upon [305] us
     presently.

     TAMBURLAINE.  See, my physicians, now, how Jove hath sent
     A present medicine to recure my pain!
     My looks shall make them fly; and, might I follow,
     There should not one of all the villain's power
     Live to give offer of another fight.

     USUMCASANE.  I joy, my lord, your highness is so strong,
     That can endure so well your royal presence,
     Which only will dismay the enemy.

     TAMBURLAINE.  I know it will, Casane.--Draw, you slaves!
     In spite of death, I will go shew my face.
          [Alarms.  Exit TAMBURLAINE with all the rest (except the
          PHYSICIANS), and re-enter presently.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thus are the villain cowards [306] fled for fear,
     Like summer's vapours vanish'd by the sun;
     And, could I but a while pursue the field,
     That Callapine should be my slave again.
     But I perceive my martial strength is spent:
     In vain I strive and rail against those powers
     That mean t' invest me in a higher throne,
     As much too high for this disdainful earth.
     Give me a map; then let me see how much
     Is left for me to conquer all the world,
     That these, my boys, may finish all my wants.
          [One brings a map.]
     Here I began to march towards Persia,
     Along Armenia and the Caspian Sea,
     And thence unto [307] Bithynia, where I took
     The Turk and his great empress prisoners.
     Then march'd I into Egypt and Arabia;
     And here, not far from Alexandria,
     Whereas [308] the Terrene [309] and the Red Sea meet,
     Being distant less than full a hundred leagues,
     I meant to cut a channel to them both,
     That men might quickly sail to India.
     ]From thence to Nubia near Borno-lake,
     And so along the Aethiopian sea,
     Cutting the tropic line of Capricorn,
     I conquer'd all as far as Zanzibar.
     Then, by the northern part of Africa,
     I came at last to Graecia, and from thence
     To Asia, where I stay against my will;
     Which is from Scythia, where I first began, [310]
     Backward[s] and forwards near five thousand leagues.
     Look here, my boys; see, what a world of ground
     Lies westward from the midst of Cancer's line
     Unto the rising of this [311] earthly globe,
     Whereas the sun, declining from our sight,
     Begins the day with our Antipodes!
     And shall I die, and this unconquered?
     Lo, here, my sons, are all the golden mines,
     Inestimable drugs and precious stones,
     More worth than Asia and the world beside;
     And from th' Antarctic Pole eastward behold
     As much more land, which never was descried,
     Wherein are rocks of pearl that shine as bright
     As all the lamps that beautify the sky!
     And shall I die, and this unconquered?
     Here, lovely boys; what death forbids my life,
     That let your lives command in spite of death.

     AMYRAS.  Alas, my lord, how should our bleeding hearts,
     Wounded and broken with your highness' grief,
     Retain a thought of joy or spark of life?
     Your soul gives essence to our wretched subjects, [312]
     Whose matter is incorporate in your flesh.

     CELEBINUS.  Your pains do pierce our souls; no hope survives,
     For by your life we entertain our lives.

     TAMBURLAINE.  But, sons, this subject, not of force enough
     To hold the fiery spirit it contains,
     Must part, imparting his impressions
     By equal portions into [313] both your breasts;
     My flesh, divided in your precious shapes,
     Shall still retain my spirit, though I die,
     And live in all your seeds [314] immortally.--
     Then now remove me, that I may resign
     My place and proper title to my son.--
     First, take my scourge and my imperial crown,
     And mount my royal chariot of estate,
     That I may see thee crown'd before I die.--
     Help me, my lords, to make my last remove.
          [They assist TAMBURLAINE to descend from the chariot.]

     THERIDAMAS.  A woful change, my lord, that daunts our thoughts
     More than the ruin of our proper souls!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Sit up, my son, [and] let me see how well
     Thou wilt become thy father's majesty.

     AMYRAS.  With what a flinty bosom should I joy
     The breath of life and burden of my soul,
     If not resolv'd into resolved pains,
     My body's mortified lineaments [315]
     Should exercise the motions of my heart,
     Pierc'd with the joy of any dignity!
     O father, if the unrelenting ears
     Of Death and Hell be shut against my prayers,
     And that the spiteful influence of Heaven
     Deny my soul fruition of her joy,
     How should I step, or stir my hateful feet
     Against the inward powers of my heart,
     Leading a life that only strives to die,
     And plead in vain unpleasing sovereignty!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Let not thy love exceed thine honour, son,
     Nor bar thy mind that magnanimity
     That nobly must admit necessity.
     Sit up, my boy, and with these [316] silken reins
     Bridle the steeled stomachs of these [317] jades.

     THERIDAMAS.  My lord, you must obey his majesty,
     Since fate commands and proud necessity.

     AMYRAS.  Heavens witness me with what a broken heart
          [Mounting the chariot.]
     And damned [318] spirit I ascend this seat,
     And send my soul, before my father die,
     His anguish and his burning agony!
          [They crown AMYRAS.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now fetch the hearse of fair Zenocrate;
     Let it be plac'd by this my fatal chair,
     And serve as parcel of my funeral.

     USUMCASANE.  Then feels your majesty no sovereign ease,
     Nor may our hearts, all drown'd in tears of blood,
     Joy any hope of your recovery?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Casane, no; the monarch of the earth,
     And eyeless monster that torments my soul,
     Cannot behold the tears ye shed for me,
     And therefore still augments his cruelty.

     TECHELLES.  Then let some god oppose his holy power
     Against the wrath and tyranny of Death,
     That his tear-thirsty and unquenched hate
     May be upon himself reverberate!
          [They bring in the hearse of ZENOCRATE.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now, eyes, enjoy your latest benefit,
     And, when my soul hath virtue of your sight,
     Pierce through the coffin and the sheet of gold,
     And glut your longings with a heaven of joy.
     So, reign, my son; scourge and control those slaves,
     Guiding thy chariot with thy father's hand.
     As precious is the charge thou undertak'st
     As that which Clymene's [319] brain-sick son did guide,
     When wandering Phoebe's [320] ivory cheeks were scorch'd,
     And all the earth, like Aetna, breathing fire:
     Be warn'd by him, then; learn with awful eye
     To sway a throne as dangerous as his;
     For, if thy body thrive not full of thoughts
     As pure and fiery as Phyteus' [321] beams,
     The nature of these proud rebelling jades
     Will take occasion by the slenderest hair,
     And draw thee [322] piecemeal, like Hippolytus,
     Through rocks more steep and sharp than Caspian cliffs: [323]
     The nature of thy chariot will not bear
     A guide of baser temper than myself,
     More than heaven's coach the pride of Phaeton.
     Farewell, my boys! my dearest friends, farewell!
     My body feels, my soul doth weep to see
     Your sweet desires depriv'd my company,
     For Tamburlaine, the scourge of God, must die.
          [Dies.]

     AMYRAS.  Meet heaven and earth, and here let all things end,
     For earth hath spent the pride of all her fruit,
     And heaven consum'd his choicest living fire!
     Let earth and heaven his timeless death deplore,
     For both their worths will equal him no more!
          [Exeunt.]

